1
2
The Bhagavad Gita For Awakening
A Practical Commentary for Leading a Successful 
Spiritual Life
Abbot George Burke
(Swami Nirmalananda Giri)
 
©2021 Light of the Spirit Monastery
Light of the Spirit Press
Cedar Crest, New Mexico, USA
LightoftheSpiritPress.com
OCOY.org
3
Bhagavad GitaÐThe Book of Life
Several thousand years ago in north-central India, two people sat in a chariot in 
the midpoint of a great battleÞeld. One of them, the yogi Arjuna, knew that it 
would not be long before the conßict would begin. So he asked Krishna, the Master 
of Yoga (Yogeshwara), what should be his attitude and perspective in this moment. 

And above all: What should he do?
There was no time to spare in empty words. In a brief discourse, later turned 
into seven hundred Sanskrit verses by the sage Vyasa, Krishna outlined to Arjuna 

the way to live oneÕs entire life so as to gain perfect self-knowledge and self-
mastery.
The battle was ferocious andÐas always with warÐeveryone lost. But when Vyasa 
wrote his epic poem, the Mahabharata (The Great Indian War), he put KrishnaÕs 

inspired teachings into it as a precious jewel. Instantly they were extracted, named 
Bhagavad Gita (The Song of God), and circulated throughout the subcontinent.
That was several thousand years ago, and today the Gita is found in nearly every 
household in India and has been translated into every major language of the world. 

Literally billions of copies have been handwritten and printed. (A few years ago a 

spiritual organization in South Africa printed one million copies for free 
distribution.) When Rudyard Kipling became a Freemason in Lahore, four 
scriptures were on the altar, including the Bhagavad Gita.
What is the appeal of the Gita? First of all, it is totally practical, free of any 
vague or abstract philosophy. During my Þrst trip to India over forty years ago, I 

heard about a yogi who lived in a small houseboat on the Ganges river in the holy 

city of Benares (Varanasi). He never spoke or wrote, yet every day for many years 
people came to him for advice. How did he manage? He had a copy of the Bhagavad 
Gita, and after he was told the problem or question he would open the book, point 

to a portion, and the inquirer would have a perfect and complete solution to the 
trouble.
My own spiritual awakening began by kicking me out of the nest of comfortable 
religion into a vast world of realities I had no idea how to cope with. I ßoundered 

around in the sea of my new horizons until one day I bought a paperback edition of 
the Bhagavad Gita. I did not read it, I inhaled it. I was not reading the words of a 

long-dead teacher: my own Self was talking to me in the pages of that little book. 
Nor did I learn anything from the GitaÐI 
remembered
 that which I had always known. 
Eternal Self spoke Eternal Truth. The Bhagavad Gita changed my life by giving me 
Life that has never ended.
Nothing has ever arisen in my life, internal or external, that the Gita has not 
made clear and enabled me to deal with or understand. Yet is it not dogmatic. At 

the very end Krishna says to Arjuna: ÒNow I have taught you that wisdom which is 
the secret of secrets. Ponder it carefully. Then act as you think best.Ó No threats, no 
promises, no coercion. It is all in the readerÕs hands.
4
Even better: the Bhagavad Gita tells us that we can attain a Knowing beyond 
even what it tells us. And it shows us the way. It is a wise resolve to read the Gita 
every day without fail for the rest of oneÕs life.
A practical suggestion
The translation used in this commentary is my own, but I recommend that you 
obtain other translations of the Gita, for it is impossible to produce a deÞnitive 
translation of a text written in such a complex language as Sanskrit. I always check 
at least four translations when looking into the meaning of a verse: those of Swamis 
Prabhavananda, Swarupananda, Sivananda, and that of Winthrop Sargeant. I 

sometimes consult those of Sri Aurobindo, Gandhi, and William Judge, as well.
I would like to point out that reading any English-only translation of the Gita, 
however good, will only be skimming the surface. This is because of the many 

meanings of Sanskrit wordsÐmeanings that were in the mind of Vyasa and that were 
used for that very reason. In the West we have the idea that spiritual texts have but 
one meaning, and that may be so for some, but this is not at all the case for Sanskrit 

texts which are intended to have multi-level messages and subtle nuances. Words 
which carry several relevant ideas are ideal for the profound wisdom of the Gita and 
Upanishads, particularly.
In the Gita translation, words in parentheses indicate alternate readings of the 
actual Sanskrit word preceding them. Those alternate readings are as legitimate as 

the English term I have used. Brackets indicate words not in the Sanskrit text but 

inserted by me to clarify the meaning.
Because of this I recommend that you obtain translations of the Gita that 
contain the Sanskrit text with word-by-word translations as well as the usual verse 

form. SargeantÕs translation is deÞnitely the best for this, but it would be good to 
have one or two more. In addition you need some Sanskrit dictionaries. I 
recommend: 
A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy
 by John Grimes, 
The Yoga-Vedanta 
Dictionary
 of Swami Sivananda, 
Sanskrit Glossary of Yogic Terms
 by Swami Yogakanti 
and 
A Sanskrit Dictionary
 by John M. Denton. My own endeavor, 
A Brief Sanskrit 
Glossary,
 is certainly helpful, and deÞnitely complements them.
Swami Nirmalananda Giri
(Abbot George Burke)
5
The BattleÞeld of the Mind
Most of us have heard the story of the centipede who, when asked how he 
managed to walk with so many legs, tangled his legs in the attempt to Þgure it out 
and ended up on his back, helpless. This is not unlike the person who attempts to 
plumb the depths of oriental scriptures. Right away it becomes evident that they 

consist of incalculable layers, many symbolic in nature. Furthermore, the meanings 
of the symbols are not consistent, changing according to the levels on which they 
occur. For example, on one level water symbolizes the mind, on another level the 

constant ßux of samsara, and on another the subtle life-currents known as prana. 
This being the case, the Western linear mode of thought becomes as entangled and 
disabled as the fabled centipede. Knowing this to be so, I have decided to avoid 

subtle symbolism and concentrate instead on the obviously practical side of 
KrishnaÕs teachings in the Bhagavad Gita. (For an exposition of the symbolism of 
the Gita, see Paramhansa YoganandaÕs commentary,
 God Talks With Arjuna: The 
Bhagavad Gita
.) However I do want to take some time and consider the obvious 
symbolism encountered in the Þrst chapter of the Gita.
We Þnd ourselves on Kurukshetra, a Þeld of impending battle. It is not as vast as 
our Hollywood-epic-shaped minds might imagine, as can be seen for oneself by a 

visit to Kurukshetra, not very far from Delhi. At one end is a hillock topped with a 
huge tree under which there is a great bronze statue of Arjuna, Krishna and their 

chariot. (When I was there only the tree and a large marble replica of the chariot 
marked where they sat.) This is the vantage point from which Arjuna, the great 
warrior, and Sri Krishna, his teacher, looked out over the Þeld. Today its tranquillity 

is charming, despite the strong feeling in the air that something tremendously 
momentous occurred there in the distant past. It is both awesome and soothing.
For background information regarding how the battleground came to be 
thronged with soldiers, chariots, elephants and the other paraphernalia of a deadly 

war, see the introductory essay, ÒGita and MahabharataÓ in Swami PrabhavanandaÕs 
translation 
The Song of God
.
Su
!
ce it to say that the two opposing armies are very easy to morally identify. 
The Kauravas, led by the murderous Prince Duryodhana, are fundamentally evil, 

although many honorable men have, through various complicated alliances and 

obligations, found themselves among their ranks. The Pandavas, headed by the 
virtuous and noble Yudhisthira, the eldest brother of Arjuna, are embodiments of 
all that is good, among them being the divine Sri Krishna himself who chose to be 

the charioteer of Arjuna.
The symbolism is not very hard to Þgure out (leaving aside the complex matter 
of assigning a symbolic meaning to every person named in the battle narrative). 

Kurukshetra is the personalityÐparticularly the mind (intellect)Ðof the awakened 
seeker for higher consciousness. Such a seeker, determined to end the whirling cycle 
6
of birth and death, Þnds that his aspiration itself has inspired opposition from 
within his own mind and heart, where good and evil, truth and falsehood, ignorance 
and wisdom, like the Kauravas and Pandavas, have drawn themselves up in 
readiness for a conßict that must end in the annihilation of one side or the other. 

Even more daunting is the fact that much considered good is found lining up in 
support of negativity, and most of the Pandava side will also be blotted out in the 
eventual transmutation of the individual into a higher state of being itself, much as 

the endearing ways of infancy and childhood must be eradicated at the advent of 
adulthood and replaced with completely di
"
erent virtues.
In the chariot set betwixt the two armies we Þnd Arjuna and Krishna. Many 
interpretations of these two pivotal Þgures are possible, nearly all of them correct, 

but the words of the Mundaka Upanishad, written long before the Gita, are 
certainly worthy of our attention.
ÒLike two birds of golden plumage, inseparable companions, the individual self 
and the immortal Self are perched on the branches of the selfsame tree. The former 

tastes of the sweet and bitter fruits of the tree; the latter, tasting of neither, calmly 

observes.
ÒThe individual self, deluded by forgetfulness of his identity with the divine Self, 
bewildered by his ego, grieves and is sad. But when he recognizes the worshipful 

Lord as his own true Self, and beholds his glory, he grieves no moreÓ (Mundaka 
Upanishad 3:1:1, 2. This is the translation found in 
The Upanishads, Breath of the 
Eternal
, by Swami Prabhavananda.)
These two paragraphs are a perfect picture of the setting of the Gita. Arjuna is 
the bewildered and sorrowing Atma, the individual Self, and Krishna is the divine 
Paramatma, the Supreme Self from which the Atma derives its very being and 

existence. Forgetful of its true nature as part of the InÞnite Spirit, the Þnite spirit 
passes through countless experiences that confuse and pain it, producing utterly 
false conclusions that compound and perpetuate the confusion and pain. Only when 

the perspective of the Divine Self is entered into, can its troubles cease. We can also 
think of Arjuna as our lower, mortal self, and Krishna as our higher, immortal Self. 
Krishna and Arjuna thus represent both God and Man and our own (presently) dual 

nature as mortal and immortal. Keeping this perspective before us, the ensuing 
dialogue which forms the Gita is to be seen both as GodÕs communication to human 
beings and the communication of our own divine Self with our human self, 

liberation (moksha) of the spirit being their sole intention.
With this in mind, we are ready to begin. I will be using my own version of the 
Gita which is based a great deal on the translation of Winthrop Sargeant: 
The 
Bhagavad Gita
, published by State University of New York Press, which I recommend 
as an excellent version, especially since it gives a word-by-word translation of the 
entire text. The translation of Swami Prabhavananda is unparalleled for beauty and 

interpretation, so I recommend both translations.
7
On The Field of Dharma
We begin with King Dhritarashtra, the blind father of the evil Duryodhana:
Dhritarashtra said: Assembled there on dharmaÕs ÞeldÐKurukshetraÐ
desiring war, what did my sons and the Pandavas, O Sanjaya? (1:1)
The opening words of this verse are 
dharmakshetre kurukshetre
: Òthe Þeld of 
dharma, the Þeld of the Kurus.Ó Dharma means the right way of thought and action, 
but it can also mean the accurate expression of oneÕs own dominant character, for 
dharma also means Òquality.Ó This entire world is a dharmakshetra, a Þeld upon 

which we act out the character of our inner makeupÐi.e., the quality of our 
emotions, mind, intellect, and will. We as individuals are each a dharmic Þeld, 
expressing the actuality of our present level of evolution.
How is it, though, that the Þeld of dharma is the Þeld of the Kurus, the enemies 
of dharma? This is necessary for the portrayal of our present situation here in the 

world. Not only do negativity and ignoranceÐthe enemies of dharmaÐdominate 

society in general, we Þnd within ourselves a welter of negative impulses, conßicts, 
confusions, fears, and ignorance of all kinds. Yes; we are deÞnitely inÐand areÐthe 
Þeld of the Kurus, whatever our intentions may be. We are going to have to Þght 

through the whole Þeld and wipe out all the Kurus and most of the Pandavas. 
Remember, we have lived millions of lives: mineral, plant, animal, and human, and 
we have brought all the impressions (samskaras) and habits (vasanas) of those lives 

along with us. Our past is our present. No wonder we are in trouble! But, as Swami 
Sri Yukteswar often said: ÒForget the past. The vanished lives of all men are dark 
with many shames. Human conduct is ever unreliable until anchored in the Divine. 

Everything in future will improve if you are making a spiritual e
"
ort now.Ó And the 
Gita will help us in this e
"
ort.
Desiring to Þght
Yuyutsavah
 certainly means Òdesiring to Þght,Ó but it can also be translated 
Òbattle-hungry.Ó There is deep within us an impulse to divinity, but it has been 
overlain and overruled by a multitude of impulses to delusion and delusion-
produced desires. So they both Þght with each otherÐoften on the subconscious 
level. Both are Òbattle-hungryÓ for they are Þghting for their very life.
The Mahabharata War is a historical fact, just as are the Þeld of Kuruksheta, 
Krishna, and Arjuna. Yet Vyasa is using this setting and the conversation between 

Krishna and Arjuna to give us spiritual teachings, some of which are in symbol. In 

the real battle many families were represented on both sides, which depicts the 
inner conßicts of human beings, whether spiritually awakened or not.
The warriors of ignorance and delusion are children of the blind ego 
(Dhritarashtra), whereas the the inner soldiers of truth and higher consciousness 

are the children of the Spirit-Self, the divine Atman. The ego is the false self that 
8
reigns on the throne of our minds and hearts, blinding us to everything else, 
making us think that it is the reality of our beingÐthat we are it. But it is a lie. 
Buried deep within is the real Self, awaiting its liberation and possession of its 
rightful kingdom. This is why the evil twin/good twin plot always appeals to 

people; it is symbolic of our dilemma of false self/real Self.
Son of EgoÐmore of the same
Sanjaya said: King Duryodhana, seeing the Pandava forces ranged ready for 
battle, approaching his teacher, Drona, spoke these words: (1:2).
Duryodhana is certainly his father in extension, but more dangerous because he 
can seeÐthat is, he can consciously choose evil if he feels it suits his own ends. (By 
the way, Dhritarashtra literally means ÒHe by whom the kingdom is held,Ó and 
Duryodhana means Òdirty Þghter.Ó)
The Bhagavad Gita occurs in the 
Mahabharata
 epic only after an immense 
amount of historical material is given, showing all that led up to the battle. There 

we see Duryodhana as one of the foulest, most evil Þgures in recorded history. 

Many times he attempted to kill the Pandava brothers, whose kingdom he had 
usurped. He also plotted the death of Krishna several times. He is evil, and Vyasa is 
going to show this to us by his conversation with Drona, a venerable man who was 

his teacher, the one who had given him all his education and training as a kshatriya 
(a member of the warrior-ruling caste). Actually, the whole Gita consists of two 
conversations: that between Duryodhana and Drona (though it was really a 

monologue in the style of all egotists) and that between Arjuna and Krishna. Arjuna 
pleads with Krishna to teach him, but Duryodhana only seeks to set Drona straight 
and accuse him for also being the teacher of Arjuna who is now facing him as an 

opponent in battle. So it beginsÉ
Behold, O Teacher, this great army of PanduÕs sons, assembled by Arjuna 
your brilliant pupil (1:3).
See what I mean? ÒYou got us into this messÓ is the meaning. Next he rubs it in 
by enumerating the great warriors on the Pandava side:
Here are heroes, mighty archers, Bhima and ArjunaÕs equals, Yuyudhana 
and Virata, and Drupada the great car warrior (1:4).
Bhima, one of ArjunaÕs brothers, was perhaps the strongest human being that 
has ever lived. He was all brawn and no brains, but beloved by those who could 

survive knowing him. He name means Òtremendous,Ó but in the sense of terrifying. 
All those listed by Duryodhana are maharathasÐmighty chariot-warriors (car 
warriors) who could Þght huge numbers of foot-soldiers singlehandedly.
Drishtaketu, Chekitana, and the valiant King of Kashi, Purujit and 
Kuntibhoja, and Shaibya: the mightiest among men. And courageous 

Yudhamanyu, and valorous Uttamaujas; the son of Shubhadra and the sons of 

Draupadi: all great car warriors (1:5-6).
Well, that tells Drona! (Subhadra was KrishnaÕs sister. ÒThe sons of DraupadiÓ 
are the children of the Pandava brothersGl.) Even though Drona got Duryodhana 
9
into this tangle (egotists always take the credit for success, even when it is not due 
them, but always manage to blame someone else for failure), there is no need for 
worry.
Those of ours who are indeed distinguished, now know. O highest of the 
twice-born, the leaders of my army I now recount unto you by name (1:7).
As if Drona would not know all of them very well! This is extremely insultingÐas 
is the way of all bullies. The fact that he speaks of Òmy armyÓ reveals his egotism. 
ÒTwicebornÓ was a title referring to the three higher of the four castes, referring to 
their having undergone a spiritual birth through initiation into the Gayatri mantra 
and the spiritual rites of Vedic religion.
Your Lordship and Bhishma and Karna and Kripa, victorious in war, 
Ashwattama and Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta also. And many other 

heroes, whose lives are risked for my sake, ready to discharge various 

weapons, all very skilled in battle. (1:8-9).
Yes, all those who serve ego and work to ensure its preservation are certainly 
risking their lives. It is amazing to see how the world and the ego devour a person, 

sapping his life, turning him into an aimless husk, and all the while he thinks he is 
really living the good life. This is the fatal illusion in which humans dwell. Only 
those who have glimpsed the truth of their inner divinity have a chance at escaping 

the realm of death.
Bravado, not bravery
Su
!
cient is that force of ours guarded by Bhishma; insu
!
cient, though, is 
that force guarded by Bhima. Stationed in your proper places, whatever be 
your positions, certainly all of you: protect Bhishma (1:10-11).
It is true that the Pandavas were greatly outnumbered by the Kauravas. So 
naturally, those that see only with the bodily eyes would think that their numbers 

were inadequate. But throughout history great victories have been won by a fewÐ

sometimes even by only one. In the Bible (the seventh chapter of Judges) we Þnd 
that God kept telling Gideon that he had too many soldiers, and ordering that he 
pare down their numbers. He did so, and they routed a huge number of soldiers 

without even Þghting! It is foolish to think that numbers make either strength or 
right. But that is the way of Duryodhana and his kind.
Empty noise
To make Duryodhana happy, the aged Kuru grandsire, Bhishma, bellowing 
with a tremendous sound of a lionÕs roar, then blew his conch with great 
power, making a tremendous sound. Thereupon the KurusÕ conches and 
kettledrums and cymbals and trumpets were sounded all at once, producing a 
tumultuous uproar (1:12-13).
This is nothing new. In many ways bullies and thugs make a lot of noise to 
intimidate others. And it often works. But not this time.
10
Divine sound
Then Krishna and Arjuna, standing in the great chariot that was yoked 
with the white horses, sounded forth their divine conches (1:14).
This is something completely di
"
erent, not just more of the same. The 
symbolism here is important. Horses are symbolic of life-force, of prana, of energy/
power itself. White horses symbolize the powers of Divine Light. Furthermore, the 
conches of Krishna and Arjuna were not mere seashells like those of the Kurus, they 

were 
divyau
Ðdivine instruments of Light.
All that exists is vibration. The sound of the KurusÕ conches represent the 
vibrations of Maya, of delusion and ignorance, of materiality and ego. But the sound 

of the Pandava conches represents the divine inner sound of the highest level of 
consciousness. The sound of the Kurus is intended to make the spirit faint, but the 
sound of the Pandavas, the vibration of Truth, enlivens, inspires, and strengthens 

the spirit. The names of the conches are titles of Divine Sound and indicate its 
powers when invoked by the yogi.
Krishna blew Panchajanya, Arjuna blew Devadatta, and Bhima of ferocious 
deeds, blew the great conch, Paundra. King Yudhishthira, KuntiÕs son, blew 

on Anantavijaya, Nakula and Sahadeva blew on Sughosha and Manipushpaka 
(1:15-16).
Panchajanya was the name of an evil enemy defeated by Krishna. Some say he 
owned the conch that later bore his name, some say that he was a shape-changing 

demon that lived in the conch (which was under the sea), and others that Krishna 

made a conch out of his bones. But a great yogi once told me during a conversation 
in Rishikesh that it is a contracted form of Panchavijaya, which means ÒFive 
Victories,Ó meaning the spiritual victory over the Þve elements (bhutas) and 

mastery of the Þve bodies (koshas) and the Þve senses.
Devadatta means ÒGod-given,Ó the key to liberation given by God (Ishwara) 
himself to human beings.
Paundra, the yogi told me, means mighty sound, or Òof a mighty sound.Ó
Anantavijaya means Òunending victory.Ó
Sughosha also means Òmaking a great noise,Ó but the yogi said it also means 
Òmaking a sweet, soothing sound.Ó
Manipushpaka literally means Òjeweled braceletÓ or circlet. In verse seven of the 
seventh chapter we are told that ÒOn me all this universe is strung like jewels on a 

thread.Ó But the yogi told me its intended meaning is Òmind like a ßower,Ó opened 
like a lotus at the shining of the light of the Self within. It can also mean Òaerial 
chariot of the mindÓ opening and ßying in the Sky of Consciousness, the 

Chidakasha.
Whether any of these meanings are correct or intended by Vyasa cannot be 
known for sure, since Sanskrit also has undergone mutations over time. Anyhow, 

these are very good speculations, I think.
The other Pandava leaders on the battleÞeld sounded their conches as well.

And KashiÕs king, the supreme bowman, and the great warrior Shikhandi, 
11
and Dhristadyumna and Virata, and the invincible Satyaki, and Drupada and 
the sons of Draupadi, O Lord of the Earth, and ShubhadraÕs son, the mighty-
armed, each blew upon his conch(1:17-18).
This is a symbolic picture of the yogi engaged in the interior battle, who has 
marshalled all his faculties in meditation and united them, causing them to vibrate 

throughout his being. So the next verse says:
Throughout the sky and the earth resounded the terriÞc noise which rent 
asunder the hearts of those in DhritarashtraÕs ranks (1:19).
Divine Light and Divine Sound resound throughout the total being of the yogi, 
and burst apart the hearts of all the foes of the Self, Þrst rendering them powerless, 
and then annihilating them.
12
Taking Stock
Then seeing DhritarashtraÕs ranks drawn up in battle array for the 
forthcoming clash of weapons, Arjuna took up his bow, and said unto 
Krishna: O Lord of the earth, drive my chariot to stand in the midst between 
the two armies, until I can behold these battle-hungry men arrayed here with 

whom I must Þght in this conßict. I would behold those who are about to give 
battle, having assembled here wishing to do service in warfare for the evil-
minded son of Dhritarashtra. Thus addressed by Arjuna, Krishna brought the 

chief chariot to stand in the midst of the two armies. Thus facing Bhishma, 
Drona, and all the rulers of the earth, Krishna said: Behold, Arjuna, these 
Kurus assembled here. (1:20-25).
Authentic, traditional yoga is very serious and circumspect, and the intelligent 
yogi believes in the old adage: Look Before You Leap. Jesus put it this way: ÒWhich 

of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down Þrst, and counteth the cost, 

whether he have su
!
cient to Þnish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, 
and is not able to Þnish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man 
began to build, and was not able to Þnish. Or what king, going to make war against 

another king, sitteth not down Þrst, and consulteth whether he be able with ten 
thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?Ó (Luke 
14:28-31). Vyasa felt the same way.
There is an interesting detail here. Sanjaya, the narrator of the Gita, calls 
Dhritarashtra ÒLord of the Earth,Ó and Arjuna gives Krishna the same titleÐat least 

in the English translation. But in Sanskrit two di
"
erent words are used. Sanjaya 

calls Dhritarashtra 
Prithivipate
: Lord of the Earth, of prithvi, the earth element, the 
principle of non-sentient material existence. Krishna, though, is called 
Mahipate
: 
Lord of the Earth (mahi) in the sense of the intelligent world of sentient beings. It 

is the di
"
erence between marble and a marble statue. One is mere matter, the other 
an expression of intelligence and artistryÐeven genius.
What Arjuna saw
Arjuna saw standing there fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, 
brothers, sons, grandsons as well as friends, fathers-in-law and companions in 
the two armies. In both of them he saw all who were relatives arrayed. Then 
Þlled with profound pity, desponding, he said:
O Krishna, seeing my own people standing near, desiring to Þght, my 
limbs sink down, my mouth dries up, my body trembles, and my hair stands 

on end. My bow drops from my hand, my skin is burning, I am unable to 
stand; my mind is reeling.
Inauspicious omens I mark, and not good fortune do I foresee, if I should 
kill my own kinsmen in war. I do not desire victory, nor kingship and 
13
pleasures. What is kingship to us? What are enjoyments or even life? Those 
for whose sake we should desire kingship, enjoyments and pleasures, are 
arrayed in battle, abandoning their lives and riches: Teachers, fathers, sons, 
grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and 

other kinsmen, too. I do not desire to kill them who are about to killÐnot even 
for the sovereignty of the three worlds; how then for the earth? What 
pleasure could the striking down of DhritarashtraÕs sons be to us? Having 

killed these aggressors, evil would thus cling to us.
Therefore we are not justiÞed to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, our own 
kinsmen. Indeed, having killed our own people, how could we be happy? Even 

if those whose thoughts are overpowered by greed do not see the wrong 
caused by the destruction of the family, and the crime of treachery to friends, 
why should we not know to turn back from this evil through discernment of 

the evil caused by the destruction of the family?
In the destruction of the family, the long-established family dharmas 
perish. When dharma perishes, adharma predominates in the entire family. 

From overpowering by adharma the women of the family are corrupted. When 
the women are corrupted, the intermixture of caste is born. Intermixture 
brings to hell the family destroyers and the family, too. Indeed their ancestors 

fall from heaven back to earthly rebirth, deprived of o
"
erings of rice and 
water. By these wrongs of the familyÕs destroyers, producing intermixture of 
caste, caste dharmas and long-established family dharmas are obliterated. 

Those whose family dharmas have been obliterated dwell indeÞnitely in hellÐ
thus have we heard repeatedly.
Ah! Alas! we are resolved to do great evil with our greed for royal 
pleasures, intent on killing our own people. If the armed sons of 

Dhritarashtra should kill me in battle, unresisting and unarmed, this would 
be a greater happiness for me.
Thus having spoken, Arjuna, in the battle which had already begun, sat 
down upon the chariot seat, throwing down both arrow and bow, with a heart 

overcome by sorrow (1:26-47).
This is long, but needs no comment. (We will be considering the subject of caste 
and caste-mixture later.) All we need understand is the great upset of Arjuna. It is 

the symbolism that matters. As already said, when we take stock of the inner 

conßict, we identify with both sides. Thinking that if they are dissolved or 
destroyed a part of us will cease to exist, we are appalled and feel that our very 
existence is threatened. Then, like all human beings who do not like the truth when 

they see or hear it, we become ÒconfusedÓ and try to avoid the unpleasant prospect. 
Bitter as death seems the inner battle, so we shrink from it and desperately try to 
Þnd a way out.
So does Arjuna. In a lengthy and impassioned monologue he has presented to 
Krishna what is really a plea to inaction, to avoidance of conßict, thinking that such 

a negative condition is peace, whereas peace is a positive state, not the mere 
14
absence of unrest and conßict. It is also reached only through unrest and conßict, 
however little we like the fact.
Running away from spiritual obligationÐand therefore spiritual life itselfÐthe 
awakening soul on occasion brings all its ingenuity to bear on justiÞcation of such 

avoidance. Arjuna veils his aversion with words of compassion for others, when in 
actuality he is the sole object of his dishonest Òcompassion.Ó He simply does not 
wish to see others su
"
er because that will make him su
"
erÐand feel guilty for their 
su
"
ering. Krishna makes this clear to him. The Stoic, Epictetus, was once visited by 
a man who told him that he loved his daughter so much he had run from the house 
rather than see her su
"
ering from illness. Carefully, gently yet Þrmly, Epictetus led 

him to understand that it was his self-love that motivated him, not love for his 
child.
It is the same with us; ego-involvementÐaddiction, actuallyÐgrips us, and we are 
the only ones who can free ourselves from it. And battle is the only means.
KrishnaÕs response
Sanjaya said: To him who was thus overcome by pity, whose eyes were 
Þlled with tears, downcast and despairing, Krishna spoke these words
The Holy Lord said: Whence has come this faintheartedness of yours in 
the time of dangerÐignoble, not leading to heaven, but to disgrace? At no time 
should you entertain such cowardiceÐit is unsuitable in you. Abandon this 
base faintheartedness and stand up.
Arjuna said: But how can I in battle Þght with arrows against Bhishma and 
Drona, who are worthy of reverence? Better that I eat the food of beggary in 

this world instead of my slaying these great and noble gurus. If I should kill 

them, desirous for gain, in truth here on earth I would enjoy pleasures stained 
with blood. We know not which is preferable: whether we should conquer 
them, or they should conquer us. The sons of Dhritarashtra stand facing us 

after slaying whom we would not wish to live. Weakness and pity overcome 
my being; with mind in confusion as to my duty, I supplicate you: Beyond 
doubt tell me which is preferable. I am your disciple; do you direct me. Truly, 

I see nothing that can remove this sorrow that dries up my senses, though I 
should attain on earth unrivalled and prosperous dominion, or even the 
sovereignty of the gods.
Sanjaya said: Thus having addressed Krishna, Arjuna said, ÒI shall not 
Þght,Ó and became totally silent (2:1-9).
Hopefully we all sympathize with Arjuna and see his perspective which certainly 
seems to be that of dharma. Nevertheless, note that Arjuna at the end of his words 
asks Krishna to remove his errorÐif such it is. This shows his humility, in contrast 
to the arrogance and swaggering of Duryodhana. Therefore he merits the alleviation 

he pleads for. Even the wisest are conscious that they can be wrong.
15
The Smile of Krishna
Arjuna, overcome with anguish at the prospect of killing in battle those he loved 
and was obligated to respect, presented to Krishna his reasons for refusing to Þght. 
Hearing ArjunaÕs words:
To him who thus was despondent in the midst of the two armies, smiling, 
Krishna spoke these words: (2:10).
The smile of Krishna
The smile of Krishna is extremely signiÞcant, and we must be grateful to the 
sage Vyasa for including this detail that carries a momentous message.
Why did Krishna smile, considering how grief-Þlled Arjuna was, and how 
impassioned he had been in his insistence that to Þght would be the greatest of 
evilsÐin contradiction to the urging and advice of Krishna? Arjuna was both sad and 
rebellious. Yet Krishna smiled. The word in the Gita is 
prahasann
, which means to 
smile before laughing. (Sargeant renders it: Òbeginning to laugh.Ó) So it is not some 
weak smile, nor a condescending or sarcastic grimace, but a very positive sign of 
impending mirth. How is this? Krishna smiled for several reasons.
1) He was showing to Arjuna that he was not condemning him, that his words 
had in no way o
"
ended or angered him, that he could feel conÞdent of KrishnaÕs 

love and regard for him.
2) He was showing to Arjuna that he understood his feelings and his reasoning.
3) He was showing to Arjuna that all our little teapot tempests that we 
exaggerate and make into life-and-earth-shattering concerns and agonies are 
nothing to cause confusion, anxiety, anger, or grief, but rather are fever-dreams that 
will vanish the moment we rise to higher consciousness and behold them with the 
perspective of the divine spirit that is our true nature.
This reminds me of an incident in the life of Sri Anandamayi Ma. A man came to 
see her, overwhelmed with grief at the recent death of his wife. ÒMa will understand 

my su
"
ering,Ó he said to himself, Òshe will realize the extent of my sorrow.Ó But the 
moment he entered the room, Ma began laughing merrily, looking at him all the 
while. ÒMa!Ó he protested, ÒSeeing how unhappy I am, how can you laugh like 
that?Ó ÒBaba,Ó Ma replied, Òthere is now one less obstacle between you and God!Ó I 

have witnessed similar incidents with Ma in which her laughter instantly healed the 
sorrow or anxiety of those who came to her for sympathy. Krishna is going to dispel 
the sadness and bewilderment of Arjuna in the same way.
4) He was showing Arjuna that his words meant nothingÐthat he was going to 
Þght anyway, because ArjunaÕs kshatriya nature would impel him to do so, whatever 

he might think he thought. Further, in KrishnaÕs perspective the battle was over and 

done; there was no question as to ArjunaÕs participation or the outcome: ÒThese 
have already been struck down by me; be merely an instrument. [Only those] 
16
already killed by me, do you kill. Do not hesitateÓ (11:33-34).
5) He was showing Arjuna that nothing can change the state of divine 
consciousness, that the myth of a Pleased/Displeased God is a foolish fable. God is 
always God, and we are always ourselves. That is how God sees itÐand so should 

we. Nothing we can say, think, or do can possibly change God in any way. If God 
could be angered or gladdened by us, he would be as ignorant, changeable, and 
subject to su
"
ering as we are. In fact, we would have more control over him than he 
has over us, as we are continually ignoring him and being indi
"
erent to him. Our 
changeability is a myth, too, for all change takes place only in the delusive 
wrappings (prakriti, shakti) of our unchanging spirit (atma, purusha). Therefore, no 

matter what we think we do, God knows we have done nothing. Swami 
PrabhavanandaÕs very interpretive translation says it very well: ÒYou dream you are 
the doer, you dream that action is done, you dream that action bears fruit. It is your 

ignorance, it is the worldÕs delusion that gives you these dreamsÓ (Bhagavad Gita 
5:14). Whatever our foolish antics, God smiles, knowing our eternal destiny within 
him.
17
Right But Wrong
Smiling, Lord Krishna says an unexpected thing to Arjuna in response to his 
fervent disquisition on how he both should not and could not engage in battle on 
the Þeld of Kurukshetra: 
The Holy Lord said: You have been mourning for those who should not be 
mourned for, though you speak words of wisdom. The wise mourn neither the 

living or the dead (2:11).
When I was a novice in a Greek Orthodox monastery which placed great 
emphasis on the mystical approach to Christianity and on meditation (Hesychia) 

particularly, one of the prime inspirations was Saint Gregory Palamas, a great mystic 
and author on the subject of interior prayer. When looking through the original 

Greek texts of the collection of spiritual writings known as the 
Philokalia
, I came 
across a writing of Saint Gregory that had some diagrams. Not knowing any but the 

most elementary Greek (little more than the alphabet), I took the volume to a 

Greek-speaking monk and asked what the article as about. To my amazement he 
told me that it was an explanation of how the world was ßat and how completely 
irrational and baseless it was to say the world was spherical! (Why such a subject 

would be treated in a collection of mystical writings was not explained to me.) Now, 
Saint Gregory possessed a brilliant intellect and his arguments were thoroughly 
logicalÐbut he was wrong.
Later on I decided to read the complete writings of Saint Gregory of Nyssa, one 
of the greatest mystics of the early Christian Church. I was not disappointed, for his 

words are truly inspired and his insights invaluable. But then I came up against a 

real surprise. His brother, Saint Basil the Great, gave a series of discourses on the 
days of creation, but died before he could give the Þnal sermon. So Saint Gregory 
decided to complete the work by writing an article on the Þnal day of creation. In 

the article he discusses the human anatomy and for some reason presents a lengthy 
and complicated explanation of why and how human beings sneeze. The 
explanation is ingenious and equally erroneous, not to say genuinely funny. Again, 

the words were very logical, quite reasonable, but utterly mistaken to the point of 
silliness. And in both instances both the GregoriesÕ sincerity and conviction 
counted for absolutely nothing. Wrong is wrong.
One of the funniest ÒwrongsÓ of a spiritual Þgure was the outlawing of hurdy-
gurdies by one of the Popes in the Middle Ages. This was based on the fact that the 

hurdy-gurdy was the instrument played by wandering beggars, and wherever the 

beggars went the plague broke out. Not knowing about germs, the Pope concluded 
that hurdy-gurdy music caused the plague! Reason led to folly.
Millennia before the Gregories, Arjuna looked out at the battleÞeld, and seeing 
those he loved and even revered was overwhelmed with the enormity of killing 

them, and expressed his feelings to Krishna, as we have just seen in the previous 
18
article.
KrishnaÕs reaction to this impassioned speech was to smile and say: ÒYour words 
are wise, Arjuna, but you are wrong.Ó He then explained very fully just why 
ArjunaÕs conclusions were mistaken, and we will be looking at his explanations 

later, but for now it will be beneÞcial for us to pursue this matter of being wrong 
even when we seem to be right.
The fundamental problem is the character of the mind itself. It is intended as a 
link between the witness-consciousness that is our pure spirit and the outer world 

that is really only a dream in the mind of God and our minds, for we are co-
dreamers with God, dreamers within the Great Dream of creation and evolution.
God and his creation are a bit like Moliere and his plays. Backstage he wrote out 
in large script the basics of the plot and the actors went onstage and improvised 

their lines and actions within MoliereÕs parameters. After many performances the 

words were written down and Moliere has received all the credit for their 
improvisation. In the same way God has set the boundaries and the basic scenario 
of evolution in consciousness. We then ad-lib our way through the whole thing 

until we develop the good sense to listen to those who have already trodden the 
way and given instructions on the right way to go about it. Part of this good sense is 
the awareness that we rarely know what we are doing or see anything correctly or 

fullyÐfor that is the nature of the mind: distortion and incompleteness.
Yet the mind is part of our equipment for evolution, so what shall we do? Clarify 
and correct it: put Humpty Dumpty together. And that can be done by meditation. 

For Krishna is going to tell Arjuna: ÒThe yoga-yoked sage quickly attains Brahman,Ó 
and ÒHe should practice yoga for the purpose of self-puriÞcationÓ (5:6; 6:12).
In the purity of mind produced by meditation, intuition comes to the fore, 
replacing discursive (and consequently tangled) thought, thus making the mind an 

instrument of perception rather than an interference in perception. For our 
thoughts are mostly static and distortion. In time through the e
"
ect of meditation 

we no longer thinkÐwe know. Therefore: ÒWith mind made steadfast by yoga, which 
turns not to anything else, to the Divine Supreme Spirit he goes, meditating on 
himÓ (8:8).
19
Birth and DeathÐThe Great Illusions
No coward soul is mine,
No trembler in the worldÕs storm-troubled sphere:
I see HeavenÕs glories shine,
And Faith shines equal, arming me from Fear.
O God within my breast,
Almighty, ever-present Deity!

Life, that in me has rest,
As I, undying Life, have power in Thee!
Vain are the thousand creeds
That move menÕs hearts: unutterably vain;
Worthless as withered weeds,

Or idlest froth amid the boundless main,
To waken doubt in one
Holding so fast by Thy inÞnity,
So surely anchored on
The steadfast rock of Immortality.
With wide-embracing love
Thy Spirit animates eternal years,

Pervades and broods above,
Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates, and rears.
Though earth and moon were gone,
And suns and universes ceased to be,
And Thou wert left alone,

Every existence would exist in Thee.
There is not room for Death,
Nor atom that his might could render void:
ThouÐthou art Being and Breath,
And what thou art may never be destroyed.
Emily Bronte wrote the foregoing only a matter of weeks before her death, 
revealing a profundity of spiritual realization that belied her conÞned nineteenth-

century rural Yorkshire background. Upanishadic as the above stanzas may be, the 
insights expressed therein seem to have arisen totally from within her own divine 
20
spirit. Years before she penned these lines, she wrote a poem in which the 
experience of samadhi is described as well as it can be. (There is a very slight 
chance that during her brief period of education in Brussels she might have come 
across a French translation of the Upanishads. This would not, however, account for 

the Advaitic content of her poetry written before that time.)
Emily Bronte has something in common with Arjuna: she was facing death, her 
own imminent death, and Arjuna was facing the surety of death for many he beheld 

on both sides assembled on the battleÞeld of Kurukshetra, as well as the likelihood 
of his own death. From the depths of her own immortal Self (Atma) the assurance 
of immortality arose in the mind and heart of Emily. From the front of his chariot, 

the voice of Krishna entered into the ears of Arjuna, awakening his innate 
understanding, enabling him to see, as did Emily Bronte, the truth of his own 
immortal being.
One thing that marks out the various world religions from the vision of the 
Vedic rishis is the fact that they all claim to have a ÒnewÓ message for a ÒnewÓ age, 

a heretofore unheard-of annunciation of truth. The rishis, quite to the contrary, 

knew and said that they were speaking eternal facts that were like the principles of 
mathematics. Consequently, as Sri Ramakrishna stated: ÒThe Hindu religion alone 
is the Sanatana Dharma. The various creeds you hear of nowadays have come into 

existence through the will of God and will disappear again through his will. They 
will not last forever.É The Hindu religion has always existed and will always 
existÓ (
The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
, p. 642). The religion of the Vedas, Upanishads, 
and Bhagavad Gita alone are the Eternal Religion (Sanatana Dharma), for it is 
oriented toward eternity, not toward time, and takes into consideration only the 
Unchanging in the midst of the ever-changing.
Just as it was the spirit, the true Self, of Emily Bronte that was speaking in this 
poem, so it is our own true Self that is speaking to us through the mouth of Krishna 

in the Bhagavad Gita. When I Þrst read the Gita, I did not have a sense of reading 

some ancient document or primeval wisdom spoken through the lips of a long-
departed sage or avatar. Rather I felt that my own soul was speaking to me directly, 
that I was being taught by my own Self guiding me toward realization of my 

ultimate Self: God. I did not accept or adopt a religionÐI awoke to the truth of 
myself and God. The Vedic sages did not have a religion in the commonly accepted 
sense: they had a Vision. And the Gita called me to that same vision, and pointed 

me toward meditation (yoga) as the only means of gaining it. The Gita gave me a 
pretty good idea of yoga, and Patanjali Þlled in the rest. Although she had no such 
books to guide and inspire her, the Yogi of Haworth, Emily Bronte, nonetheless 

attained the Vision by turning within and letting her inmost consciousness lead her 
to the Divine Center.
Now we are about to hear our own Self tell us the truth about ourselves and Òall 
that we see or seemÓ which is indeed Òbut a dream within a dream,Ó as Poe 

intuited.
21
The living and the dead
ÒThe wise mourn neither the living or the dead,Ó says Krishna to Arjuna. Why? 
Because there are no ÒlivingÓ or ÒdeadÓ in the sense that those with bodies are alive 
and those divested of a body are dead. Nor is there such a duality as life and death. 

These are only the illusions produced by the distorting veils of ignorance.
ÒLead me from death to immortalityÓ is not a petition to gain a state where we 
will nevermore experience bodily death, but a plea to be led from the outward-

turned consciousness that produces death to the in-turned consciousness that 
produces life. It is spirit itself that is immortalityÐnothing else. ÒChange and decay 
all around I see. O Thou Who changest not: abide with me.Ó What we are praying 

for is consciousness itself.
The truth about us
Yes, the plain fact is this: There are no dead. For Krishna continues: 
Truly there never was a time when I was not, nor you, nor these lords of 
menÐnor in the future will there be a time when we shall cease to be (2:12).
We are as eternal as God himself because we derive our very being from God. 
Just as there was never a time when God did not exist, nor can there be a time 
when he will not existÐespecially since he is utterly outside of timeÐso there can 

never come a time when we shall not exist, for we, too, exist outside of time 
however enmeshed we are in the experience of time through the temporal 
instruments of the body and mind.
Krishna is also making it clear that our distinction as individualsÐboth from 
other Þnite beings and from GodÐis also eternal. There is absolutely no place in the 

Gita for the teaching that in time we melt into the inÞnite and exist no more as a 

distinct entity, only God remaining, our having never really existed at all. Yet 
Krishna does not say we exist separately from God and from one another at any 
time, for that is also impossible. There is absolute unity, yet within that unity is an 

eternal diversity. Advaita is the true viewÐNot Two, which is in no way the same as 
One, or Monism.
Although Krishna declares that he, Arjuna, and all those present on the 
battleÞeld exist eternally, he does not mean that their present conditioned 

personalities are eternal and unchangeable. Just as our spirits transcend time, so 
our personalities, which are nothing more than masks shaped by our past and 

present lives, exist only within time and are ever-changing until they are dissolved 
in the light of spiritual knowledge (jnana). Our personalities are indeed separate 
from God, and as long as we identify with them we will feel separated from him and 

engage in the delusional ÒsearchÓ and Òreaching outÓ for God. I say delusional 
because our true selves (atmas) are never separate from God. ÒHe is not far from 
every one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have our being; for we are also 

his o
"
springÓ (Acts 17:27-28). Our personalities can never Þnd or touch God 
because they simply do not exist as actualÐmuch less eternalÐrealities. It is those 

who identify with the personality and think it is their true Self that fall into the trap 
22
of either Dualism or Monism.
The result of immortality
Yet we are ignorant; without facing that fact we will never e
"
ectively aspire to 
the knowledge of Reality. And until we attain that knowledge what happens to us? 
Krishna supplies the answer: 
As to the embodied person childhood, youth and old age arise in turn, so 
he gets another bodyÐthe wise are not deluded by this (2:13).
Evolution is implied here, also continuity of consciousness/being and the utter 
naturalness and even painlessness of the process. It is all a matter of outer 
experience, not of inner reality. But we should look at the pieces of the puzzle as set 
forth in this verse.
The Number One Fact is the existence of Òthe embodied,Ó the immortal Self. 
Here lies the core of the whole matterÐliterally. All experience which we undergo at 

any time is what motion picture theaters in the nineteen-sixties used to call Òsense-
surround.Ó That is, our consciousness is surrounded by, enwrapped in, a series of 

sheaths (koshas) which convey all the experiences which it erroneously thinks are 
happening to it. Rather than understanding that it is merely watching screens on 
which are projected the various sensationsÐsome seeming to be outer and some 

seeming to be innerÐthe spirit thinks that it is seeing, feeling, tasting, etc., that it is 
happy, sad, desolate, fulÞlled, and so on (and on and on). In meditation we can 
think these Òscreen shotsÓ are atmic experience if we are not careful.
Just how this all comes about is really in the Þeld of Sankhya philosophy and 
Yoga which will be taken up later on by Krishna. For now the important point to 

realize is that we are ever separate from all that we see or seem. We are the tenant, 

not the dwelling; we are the worker of the machine, not the machine. This dweller 
in the body, our true Self or Atma, is the sole reality throughout our many 
incarnations. When we are centered in that we are free; when we are drawn out and 

into the surrounding show, we are bound. It is just that simple, though the process 
of involving and evolving is incalculably complex.
Evolution is also spoken of here. Through childhood, youth, and old age there is 
constant growth and developmentÐat least for the awakening individual. That is the 

purpose of the cosmos itself: the evolution of the individual in order to develop the 
capacity for inÞnite consciousness. So this is the purpose of dwelling in the bodyÐit 

is a tool for far more than mere learning, it is a means of evolving from Þnitude to 
inÞnity, from microcosmic to macrocosmic consciousness. And this evolution is as 
inevitable and natural as the aging of the body.
We have a great deal of fear about death and hear a lot about Òhard deathsÓ and 
Òdeath struggles,Ó yet those who have recovered their memories of previous lives 

assure us that death is the easiest phase of life, that at the Great Moment the 

ÒdewdropÓ really does Òslip into the Shining SeaÓ with a great sense of peace and 
relief.
ÒHe gets another body.Ó This can literally be translated Òhe arrives at another 
23
body.Ó That is, in time he will again pass into the material body and be reborn in 
the physical plane.
The wise know
However, Òthe wise are not deluded by this.Ó Those who have gained some 
wisdom in previous births are able to understand, even in childhood, their actual 
separation from the inner and outer worlds. If their constant experience of those 

worlds does not overwhelm them, they are no longer deluded into thinking that 
their true Self has been born or shall ever die; nor do they deÞne themselves 
according to the movies shown to them on the screens of their acquired bodies. 

They do not identify with bodily conditions or even the states of mind that arise 
before their observing eye. In the ripest state of wisdom development they say with 
Shankaracharya:
I am not the mind, intellect, thought, or ego;

Not hearing, not tasting, not smelling, not seeing;

I am not the elementsÐether, earth, Þre, air:
I am the form of Conscious Bliss: I am Spirit!
I am neither Prana, nor the Þve vital airs;
Nor the seven components of the gross body;
Nor the subtle bodies; nor organs of action:

I am the form of Conscious Bliss: I am Spirit!
I have no aversion, clinging, greed, delusion;
No envy or pride, and no duty or purpose;
I have no desire, and I have no freedom:
I am the form of Conscious Bliss: I am Spirit!
I have no merit or sin, nor pleasure or pain;
No mantra, pilgrimage, Veda or sacriÞce;

Not enjoying, enjoyable, or enjoyer:
I am the form of Conscious Bliss: I am Spirit!
I have no death or fear, no distinction of caste;
Neither father, nor mother, nor do I have birth;
No friend or relation, guru or disciple:

I am the form of Conscious Bliss: I am Spirit!
I am without attributes; I am without form;
I am all-pervading, I am omnipresent;
By senses untouched, neither free, nor knowable:
I am the form of Conscious Bliss: I am Spirit!
24
Experiencing The Unreal
Krishna has just told Arjuna that birth and death are simple illusionsÐthat the 
unborn and undying spirit (Atma) is the sole reality of our being. That is not so 
hard to accept if we have intuition or actual recall of the fact of our having 
previously dreamed the dream of birth and death many times. But the real trouble 

is our identiÞcation with the experiences that occur between the two poles of birth 
and death. It is like a joke I heard a very long time ago. In a small town where 
metaphysical speculation was completely absent, the postmaster was a Christian 

Scientist. One day he asked a little boy, ÒHow are you?Ó And the boy replied: ÒI have 
an awful stomach ache!Ó ÒOh, you just imagine that,Ó chided the postmaster. ÒYou 
only imagine you even have a stomach!Ó The next day the boy came in the post 

o
!
ce and was asked the same question by the postmaster. He stood for a while, 
thinking, and then came out with: ÒI have an imaginary pain in my imaginary 
stomach that I donÕt really have. And it HURTS!Ó
It is just the same with us. Simply saying: ÒIt is all an illusion,Ó really does very 
little. Consider how we attend a play or a motion picture and become completely 

engrossed in the spectacle, responding with various emotions. All the time we 

know it is just pretend, but that does not keep us from responding as though it 
were real. How is this? It is the natureÐyes, the purposeÐof the mind!
I will never forget the Þrst time I saw 
Hamlet
. The next day I could not attend 
any of my classes at the university. I felt that I had seen an inexpressibly great 

person die right before my eyes. The words ÒGood night, sweet prince, and ßights 
of angels sing thee to thy restÓ had utterly overwhelmed me with chagrin. For a few 

days I went around in an aura of shock. I knew that I had only witnessed light and 
shadow patterns on a blank screen, that the people I had watched were actors 
playing a partÐa part that my reading on the subject revealed was not even 

historically accurate. It made no di
"
erence. I was stunned by what I had seen. This 
is just the nature of the delusive mind. Unless that nature is transcended, we will 
experience that Òthe playÕs the thingÓ rather than an illusion. With this in mind, 

Swami Vivekananda subtitled his book 
Raja Yoga
: ÒConquering the Internal Nature.Ó 
And part of its subjugation is the realization that the ÒinnerÓ nature is also outside 

us.
Externals meet externals
Wherefore Sri Krishna next tells Arjuna:
Truly, material sensations produce cold, heat, pleasure and pain. 
Impermanent, they come and go; you must endeavor to endure them (2:14).
Matrasparshas
, Òmaterial sensations,Ó literally means Òsensations of matterÓ or 
Òthe touching of matter.Ó Cold, heat, pleasure, and pain are brought about through 
contact with materiality, whether we think of it as contact of the sense organs with 
25
matter, or of contact of the mind with the internal senses that translate the contact 
of those sense organs into mental perceptions that we label as cold, heat, pleasure, 
and pain. Even the person who knows he is not the body, senses, or mind, yet does 
experience these things. He, however, understands what they really are and can, as 

Krishna urges, learn to endure them.
Both the senses and the objects are vibrating energy, merely di
"
ering waves in 
the vast ocean of power known as Prakriti or Pradhana. Prakriti is spoken of as 

illusion because it is constantly shifting like the sea with its ever-rising and ever-
subsiding waves. Although Prakriti exists as Primordial Energy, the forms it takes 
are momentary modiÞcations only with no lasting reality.
In the philosophical writings of India we often encounter the snake-in-the-rope 
simile. Even though the ÒsnakeÓ we see in a dim light is a projection of our mind, 

and when we perceive that it is only a rope the ÒsnakeÓ will disappear, the rope will 

remain. In the same way, Prakriti is the actually-existent substratum of which all 
things are its temporary mutations. They are mere appearances, yet their substance 
is real. It is this understanding that gave rise to the Buddhist concept of EmptinessÐ

that there are no things in their own right, but only temporary appearances. When 
we see truly, things are seen to be no things at all. The truth is, Prakriti and the 
Great Void (Mahashunyata) are the same thing. It is only those who misunderstand 

them that think they are di
"
erent.
In essence, we must come to realize that all our experiences, inner and outer, are 
really external to us and are simply shifting waves of di
"
ering vibrations. 

ÒImpermanent, they come and go,Ó Krishna points out to ArjunaÐand to us.
In the ancient world, including that of original Christianity, only that which 
remained perpetually constant was considered to be real. That which could change 

or cease to be was considered unreal. For this reason we Þnd an exposition of the 
unreality of both the world and evil in the writings of Saint Athanasius the Great of 
Alexandria, even though that is in complete variance with contemporary Christian 

theology.
The thing is, 
we
 exist forever and unchanging. It is only our mistaken identity 
with our experiencesÐour identiÞcation of the screen with the temporary movieÐ

that causes us to forget this truth and become immersed in the untruth of 
Unreality/Prakriti. It is no easy matter to genuinely see the truth of things in 
relation to our sense experiences. Consequently Krishna said: ÒThis divine illusion 

of mineÉ is di
!
cult to go beyondÓ (7:14). What shall we do about these illusions 
until we have broken through them? Krishna tells us: ÒYou must endeavor to 
endure them.Ó That does not mean that we must like them or want them. But we 

must accept them as inevitable until we truly do pass from the unreal to the Real. 
Later in this very chapter Krishna will describe how an illumined person functions 
in relation to sensory experience. For now we need only understand that the man of 

wisdom, the jnani, experiences them but accepts them and is unmoved by them.
Truly, the man whom these sensations do not a
#
ict, the same in pain and 
pleasure, that wise one is Þt for immortality (2:15).
26
What he does by nature we must do by will and reasoning until we, too, are 
enlightened.
27
The Unreal and the Real
The miracle of the Gita
The Bhagavad Gita is a marvel of practical wisdom. In the Upanishads we Þnd 
the truth about Brahman, Atman, and Creation, but it is mostly speculative, 
intended to awaken the hearer to the intuition of How Things AreÐnot to merely 

instruct or convince him. After reading the Upanishads the question of 
realizing
 the 
truths set forth therein becomes most crucial. Since we presently live two lives, the 

inner and the outer, we need guidance in how to lead both of them in such a 

manner that the Upanishadic Vision will in time be permanently established in our 
own consciousness. And that state will be liberation (moksha). To enable us to 
attain liberation, two books have been given us: the Bhagavad Gita for our outer, 

active life, and the Yoga Darshan (Yoga Sutras) for our inner, meditative life. Both 
contain counsel about the inner and outer way to realization, but each focuses 
mainly on one sphere. The Bhagavad Gita is the ultimate statement on How To Live. 

Yet it perfectly embodies and presents the philosophical principles of the 
UpanishadsÐso much so that it has been said that Vyasa, the author of the Gita, 
ÒmilkedÓ the ÒcowsÓ of the Upanishads and presented to us the life-sustaining milk 

of Pure Wisdom. The Gita is a digest of the Upanishads, but also much more: it 
points the way to embody their teachings, to gain practical experience of their 
eternal truth, of Sanatana Dharma.
The right perspective
The basic ingredient of any endeavor is right perspective, so Krishna right away 
delineates two universal principles that must be kept in mind at all times, whether 
engaged in outer activity or inner meditation.
1) 
It is known that the unreal never comes to be, and the real never ceases 
to be. The certainty of both of these principles is seen by those who see the 

truth (2:16).
Swami PrabhavanandaÕs interpretive translation is: ÒThat which is non-existent 
can never come into being, and that which is can never cease to be. Those who have 

known the inmost Reality know also the nature of 
is
 and 
is not
.Ó
2) 
Know indeed that That by which all this universe is pervaded is 
indestructible. There is no one whatsoever capable of the destruction of the 

Eternal (2:17).
Prabhavananda: ÒThat Reality which pervades the universe is indestructible. No 
one has power to change the Changeless.Ó
Unless we are constantly aware of these two truths, any kind of endeavor on our 
part will result in the perpetuation of ignorance and its result: bondage. Nor are 
these abstractions to be merely accepted intellectually. They must be lived; and until 
they can be fully demonstrated in our life we must at least keep striving to bring 
28
our conscious thoughts and deeds into conformity with them. Jesus spoke of a man 
who wanted to build a house where there was sandy soil. Wisely he dug down until 
he found solid rock, and then only did he build the house so it would stand secure 
(Matthew 7:24-25). These two principles are the bedrock on which the structure of 

our entire life should be based.
What is not can never come to be
ÒThe unreal never comes to be.Ó A simple statement, but a profound realization 
about every aspect of existenceÐmost particularly our own existence and status. We 
could restate the principle this way: ÒThat which has not always been can never 

come into being.Ó If we analyze things we will come to realize that only two things 
have ever been: God and us. Everything else is literally incidental. That is why the 
greatest monk of the Christian Church, Saint Arsenios the Great, when asked for 

spiritual counsel replied: ÒUnless you say, ÔGod and I alone exist,Õ you will not Þnd 
God.Ó So when we really bear down on the issue we come to realize that Spirit 
alone exists: Spirit as the individual consciousness and Spirit as the InÞnite 

Consciousness. All other things are passing appearances only.
ÒThe fashion of this world passeth away,Ó said Saint Paul (I Corinthians 7:31). 
The word translated ÒfashionÓ in the sense of exterior appearance is 
schema
, which 
means a Þgure or outline of something, either visual or ideational, a mere thought 
or ÒschemeÓ rather than a thing of actual substance. From this we see that Saint 
Paul considered the world to be a mere appearance, a temporary thought in the 

mind of God and man. And so did Krishna.
Seeing the Real in the unreal
Since the world and all that surrounds us, including the many layers of our 
present mode of existence as human beings, come from God, it would be foolish to 
consider them valueless and to simplistically try to disengage ourselves from them 

as though that would be the solution to everything. No. Krishna is telling Arjuna to 
ÞghtÐto act as though the world were real. Why? Because all our experience is a 
training Þlm in the school of consciousness. By watching it and interacting with it 

we come to experience its substantial reality, but we also come to understand its 
meaning. For every particle of matter has a purpose and is a message from the 
Eternal to us.
Krishna is instructing Arjuna in the attitude, the perspective, needed to live life 
meaningfully. Arjuna wants to turn away from the battleÞeld, to avoid doing what 

he considers to be a terrible wrong, but Krishna restrains him and warns him 

against such a mistaken course of action, because to do so is to fail in learning the 
purpose of the situation. To leave the battle would be to deny the unreality of 
external appearance and to deny the reality of the inner spirit.
This verse carries great and freeing insight. We need not brood over our faults or 
be elated over our virtues since they have never really come into being. Neither 

should we be displeased at misfortune or pleased at good fortune, for they have 
29
never happened. Rather, the pictures of these things are being shown to us for our 
development and education leading to our mastery of them. It is not without basis 
that one of the Þrst steps in occult development is dream control; for this whole 
world is a dream, and although there is a great deal of talk about awakening from 

the dream, we cannot do so until we can control it at will. This is what Yoga is all 
aboutÐawakening through mastery.
Our eternal Self
But looking back at the subject of our own conscious developmentÉ. A lot of 
time is wasted Òcultivating virtuesÓ and pursuing yogic attainments. As Sri Ma 
Anandamayi often pointed out, getting implies losing. So any artiÞcial progress we 
may make will evaporate in time. To bewail our sins or rejoice in our virtues is utter 
madness. 
For neither exists.
 What is necessary is that we learn to bring forth, to 
reveal, our eternal nature. When the qualities we exhibit are those of the ever-free 
and ever-perfect spirit, then alone will we have ÒdoneÓ something. Merely talking 
about our eternity and perfection, using such ideas as excuses for avoiding any 

spiritual pursuit or discipline, is thoroughgoing folly. The true Self, the Atman, 
must be 
realized
Ðnot just believed in or talked about.
And the world? We should look and learn. For everything has meaning. To say 
the world is unreal and dismiss it is worse than idiotic. A sign saying Danger is not 

danger, but it indicates danger. Words, Þgures, and lines on paper are not anything 
Òreal,Ó but their import is very real. The word ÒÞreÓ is not Þre, yet when someone 

yells it we should get moving. In the same way, the world around us may not be 
ultimately real, but its message can lead us to the perception of the Reality behind 
it all, which is its Source.
Much of what I have written deals with the value of Òunreality,Ó but we must not 
forget the wonder and freeing nature of knowing what is real. For: ÒThose who have 

known the inmost Reality know also the nature of 
is
 and 
is not
.Ó
The Unchanging
Krishna further tells Arjuna: ÒThat by which all this [universe] is pervaded is 
indestructible. There is no one whatsoever capable of the destruction of the 
EternalÓ Once more we can invoke the insight of Emily Bronte to expound this 
truth in a direct and simple way that is equally profound.
O God within my breast,

Almighty, ever-present Deity!

Life, that in me has rest,
As I, undying Life, have power in Thee!
Though earth and moon were gone,
And suns and universes ceased to be,
And Thou wert left alone,
30
Every existence would exist in Thee.
There is not room for Death,
Nor atom that his might could render void:

ThouÐthou art Being and Breath,
And what thou art may never be destroyed.
This is the fruit of following the thread of the unreal to its origin in the Real and 
discovering that our own Self, being part of that Reality which pervades the 
universe, also is indestructible. All fear, regret, and sorrow vanish like the 

unrealities they are once we realize that Òthere is no one whatsoever capable of the 
destruction of the EternalÓ that is the Self of our Self.
31
The Body and the Spirit
Self-knowledge
Who am I? This is the Primeval Question, the sign that true consciousness is at 
last dawning in the evolving entity. Until this arises, the side queries such as: 
Where did I come from?É Where am I?É Where am I going?É and such like will 

result in very little. For it is the knowledge of Who I Am that alone illuminates 
them. Without this self-knowledge nothing else can really be known. Because of 
this Krishna opens his instructions to Arjuna with an exposition of the nature of 

the Self and the e
"
ect of self-knowledge on the individual, even though the subject 
at hand is why Arjuna should Þght rather than abandon the battleÞeld.
This bears out the veracity of what I just said about self-knowledge being 
necessary for the right understanding of anything. It also demonstrates that those 

who promote study of scriptures, development of devotion to God or engagement in 
good works as the paramount factor in human life are far from being disciples of 

Krishna however much they may cite the Gita and profess an emotional devotion to 
him. ÒWhy call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?Ó (Luke 6:46) 
is still a relevant question.
Having spoken of cosmic reality and relative unreality, Krishna returns to a more 
personal aspect, continuing:
These bodies inhabited by the eternal, indestructible, immeasurable, 
embodied Self are said to come to an end. Therefore, Þght! (2:18).
Bodies are said to die
Since Krishna has assured Arjuna that the unreal cannot come into being and 
that the real cannot go out of existence, he obviously cannot state that death really 
occurs. Therefore he says: ÒThese bodies are 
said
 to come to an endÓÐto die. They 
do not die for two reasons. The obvious one is that birth and death are mere 
appearances. Having never been born in reality how could the body die? However, 
the appearances of birth and death are part of the cosmic drama, part of the Divine 

Dream known as Pradhana or Prakriti. And interestingly, physics has demonstrated 
that absolutely not even a particle of an atom is ever destroyed; that every bit that 
existed/appeared in the beginning exists right nowÐonly the arrangements of the 

particles have changed. This would have to be so. Since the Dreamer is eternal and 
outside of time, so also must the Dream be in its ultimate realityÐfor can anything 
of the Divine be unreal?
The dream occurs in the Eternal Now which is the abode of the Dreamer. This is 
why Sankhya philosophy, the philosophy espoused and expounded by Krishna, 

postulates that Prakriti is eternal. When we understand its nature as a mere dream, 

a thought, this is the only possible conclusion. It is when we think of it as an actual 
substance that can come into being and go out of being that we become entangled 
32
in error. And it is this error which the Vedantists deny, the seeming conßict 
between Sankhya and Vedanta on this point only occurring in the minds of those 
who have not experienced the vision behind both philosophies, themselves known 
as 
darshanas
 (viewings).
It is necessary for the serious student of Indian philosophy, Sanatana Dharma, to 
understand that the six orthodox systems (
darshanas
) of Hinduism are all equally 

trueÐotherwise they would not be orthodox. Rather, they represent di
"
erent 

viewpoints or attitudes toward the same Reality, di
"
ering in emphasis, but never in 
substance. The preference for one over the others should be understood as a 
manifestation of personal nature (guna and karmaÐjust as with caste) only and not 

evidence of one being true (or more true) and the others false (or less true).
But That which possesses the body is eternal
The famous baby doctor, Dr. Spock, opened his book on caring for infants with a 
statement that astounded everyone. Addressing the mothers reading the book he 
said: ÒYou know more than you know you do.Ó And urged them to rely on that 

knowledge. What he was saying, actually, was that they possessed ÒmotherÕs 
intuitionÓ and should learn to tap it and act on it. Even the most esoterically and 
philosophically unsophisticated people continually use expressions that show a 

subliminal knowledge far beyond their conscious awareness. One thing is the 
universal habit of referring to our bodies as Òmine.Ó ÒI broke my leg,Ó we say, not: ÒI 
broke myself.Ó We all know instinctively that we possess our body, that it is 

separate from us and is being used only as an instrument. Yes, we identify with it 
and say things like: ÒHe hit meÓ when the body was struck, but usually we speak of 
the body as ÒmineÓ rather than Òme.Ó Or we even speak of it in a strange 

combination such as: ÒHe hit 
me
 on 
the
 arm.Ó However mixed these signals may be, 
the underlying consciousness is that of our being the owner of the body and not the 

body itself. Yet when we consciously identify ourselves and others with the 

temporary and the perishable, like Arjuna, we cannot help but be fearful and 
confused. But the truth is quite di
"
erent: we are eternal, not just long-lasting. 
Moreover, what overwhelms us is really meant to be ruled by us.
It cannot be limited, or destroyed
We are tossed about and drowned in the ocean that we are meant to sail over 
unru
#
ed and una
"
ected by wind or wave. See what Krishna says: We cannot be 
either limited or destroyed. This is incredible to us who are entrenched in the 
hypnosis called Maya. But the challenge is inescapable: this truth must be 

consciously experienced and permanently established in us. How to accomplish this 
is the message of the whole Gita.
Let us look at the implications of this. If we are in any way limited it is a result 
of our blindness. Remove the blindness and the limitations vanish. They need not 

be overcome but seen through as the mirages they really are.
If we think that we can die or be annihilated, we are deluded to the point of 
33
spiritual psychosis. For what can we do, then, but live in continual fear and despair? 
Just look at the death and burial customs of the worldÕs religions, except for 
Hinduism. They a
!
rm the immortality of the individual and assure those who 
remain behind that Òthey are in a better place.Ó It is only natural to feel grief at 

losing the presence of those who are loved, but see how the bereaved act. Not only 
is there a sense of hopelessness at the inevitability of death, the bodies are treated 
as though they are the departed person. In the West we dress them up, put makeup 

on them, style their hair, and put them in metal boxes with innerspring mattresses. 
(ÒSo they will rest easy,Ó explained one mortician to a friend of mine.) Grave sites 
are often chosen with a view the departed (?) will be sure to like. And after burial 

they are Òvisited,Ó given ßowers, and often spoken to. In some cultures the families 
put food on the graves and even have a picnic there to share a meal with the dead. 
In Cairo, when you go to the pyramids you pass through a vast section of the city 

that is the City of the Dead, composed of small houses set along a labyrinth of 
streets. Each house is a tomb. On Fridays and holidays the families visit these 
houses and have lunch with the dead, who their religion says are not there at all but 

in another plane of existence altogether. This is craziness.
On the other hand, in India the body is wrapped in bright-colored cloth and 
borne through the streets as the bearers chant over and over: 
Rama Nama satya hai
Ð
the Name of God is realÐor a similar a
!
rmation that spirit is real and death is an 
illusion. Reaching the crematory ground, scriptural passages a
!
rming the 
immortality of the spirit are recited as the Þre is kindled. When the ceremony is 
Þnished the bearers walk away without a backward look. A television documentary 
entitled 
Forest of Bliss
, showing a day at the burning ground of Varanasi (Benares) is 
worth viewing as it shows belief in immortality being lived out.
The key thing in all this is actual 
realization
 of our immortality, not just a hope or 
belief. And this is a matter of spiritual practice, as Krishna will inform Arjuna.
Therefore Þght
Something must be done. We must enter the dharma-Þeld of our inner 
awareness and do the needful. ÒFor protection of the righteous and destruction of 
evildoers, for the establishing of dharma, I manifest myself from age to ageÓ (4:8). 
Like Krishna we must release the holiness of our spirit and annihilate the delusion 
of sin. Then we will be righteous. Like Arjuna we may shrink back, get confused, 

and try to abandon our duty. But if, also like Arjuna, we make spirit-consciousness 
our charioteer we will come out all right, victorious and wise.
34
Know The Atman!
He who thinks the Self is the slayer and he who thinks the Self is slain: 
neither of the two understands; the Self slays not, nor is it slain (2:19).
Except for the most unfortunately wounded in spirit, everyone is more than 
willing to accept the truth of their immortality. Because the authority of the 
Supreme Spirit is behind each word of KrishnaÕs exhortation to Arjuna, something 
deep within us responds with recognition to each statement, and that includes his 
insistence on the eternal nature of every spirit. Consequently there is no need for 

me to keep going over and over that principle.
The body may appear to be killed, but never is the Self (Atman) slain. This does 
not mean that those who (seemingly) kill others are not culpable, for it is their 

murderous intention that is the root evil. Having learned this in India, Jesus 
insisted on its truth in his teachings. ÒYe have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the 

judgment: but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a 
cause shall be in danger of the judgmentÉ Ye have heard that it was said by them 
of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: but I say unto you, that whosoever 

looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in 
his heartÓ (Matthew 5:21-22, 27-28).
He who thinks he can be killed is mistaken. This is not very hard to grasp, but 
the second partÐthe statement that the Atman can no more slay than be slainÐis not 

so commonly accepted. So it needs due consideration.
What is going on here?
Krishna has already told Arjuna that all sensory phenomena are temporary. Later 
he will be explaining that they are nothing more than ever-shifting movements of 
energy that the individual consciousness is merely observingÐnot undergoing, as it 
thinks. Consequently the wise one watches the sense-movie and learns from it. As 
already cited, the Mundaka Upanishad expresses it thusly: ÒLike two birds of golden 

plumage, inseparable companions, the individual self and the immortal Self are 
perched on the branches of the selfsame tree. The former tastes of the sweet and 
bitter fruits of the tree; the latter, tasting of neither, calmly observes.Ó In Western 

metaphysics the expressions Òlower selfÓ and Òhigher SelfÓ are often employed for 
these two Òbirds.Ó
The situation is this: The immortal part of us, the Atman, the pure spirit 
(consciousness) ever looks on at the experiences of the lower selfÐthe mind, ego, 

subtle and gross bodiesÐall that go to make up our relative Òself.Ó But so convincing 
is the drama, so compelling and literally engrossing, that it loses itself in the 

spectacle and thinks it is born, lives, and dies over and over, feeling the pain and 
pleasure that are nothing more than impulses in the Þeld of energy that is the mind. 
35
These are the vrittis in the chitta spoken of by Patanjali at the beginning of the Yoga 
Sutras, the 
permanent
 cessation or prevention of which is Yoga. Through meditation 
we come to separate ourselves from the movie screen of illusion. 
Learning
 is the 
purpose of the movie, so we do not just throw the switch and leave the theater. 

Rather, we watch and Þgure out the meaning of everything. When we have learned 
the lessons, the movie will stop of itself. Yoga is the means of learning.
So we are points of consciousness tied to the seats of our bodies, helplessly 
watching and identifying with the 360-degree surrounding screen, overwhelmed by 

the sensory avalanche. When we cease to identify and come to see with the clarity 
of objectivity (that is the reality of the situation), then we begin to really see and 

learn. Then, just as the ear is trained by listening to music, so the consciousness is 
developed by witnessing the drama of many lives. Yet it is not 
changed
Ðit is freed. 
For change is illusion.
When we have experienced thisÐand therefore truly knownÐfor ourselves, then 
we know that nothing has ever ÒhappenedÓ to usÐonly to the vibrating substance 
which we have mistakenly thought was us. Vairagya, detachment from all things, 

then arises, for that is the only realistic response or view of our life. Then perfection 
in true knowledge (jnana) becomes our only goal, for that perfection alone is 
freedom.
The lessons to be learned
Being either killer or killed is impossible; so Krishna assures Arjuna, and us. The 
Gita is being spoken on a battleÞeld, so martial action is the subject, but the 
principles presented by Krishna can be applied to anything in life. The fundamental 
lesson is twofold: 1) everything has a meaning for us, and 2) no happening or 

change is real. But 
we
 are real, and that should be the basis of our entire perspective 
on our present entanglement in the birth-death drama.
If we are not careful we will fall into the trap of considering only the negative as 
unreal and think of the positive as real and therefore to be accepted as such. This is 
not so. Sin and virtue, hellishness and holiness, are equally unreal. However, sin 
and evil render us incapable of seeing the truth of things, whereas virtue and 

holiness wean us from the illusions around us and purify our mind so we can come 
to learn the real Facts of Life from life itself.
Yet, no change is ultimately real. Not even the decision: ÒI want to know God.Ó 
Insight and aspiration mean nothing of themselves. Only when they result in 

involvement in spiritual practice (sadhana, tapasya) do they mean anything. Yes, 
even the process of sadhana (meditation, yoga) is unreal, but its 
result
 is real in that 
it reveals the Real. In Indian thought spiritual practice is often spoken of as a thorn 
used to remove a thorn in the foot. Both are then discarded. Yoga is also just a 
movie, but it is a movie that leads to self-knowledge in which yoga ceases to be a 

practice and becomes a 
state
Ðthe state of consciousness that is our eternal being.
So all the holy and spiritual thoughts and feelings or philosophy we may come 
up with are just more of the same light and shadows that have been fooling us for 
36
countless creation cycles. They will eventually degenerate and reveal themselves as 
valueless as all our other fantasies. Only when they inspire us to take up meditation 
and authentic spiritual life are they of any worth, assisting us in drawing nearer and 
nearer to The Real.
The e
"
ects of self-knowledge
But knowing the Atman-Self is a di
"
erent matter altogether. The attainment of 
self-knowledge is not the same as working out a puzzle or Þguring out a riddle. It 
has a practical e
"
ect: eternal peace and freedom. Therefore Krishna continues:
Neither is the Self slain, nor yet does it die at any time, nor having been 
will it ever come not to be. Birthless, eternal, perpetual, primeval, it is not 

slain whenever the body is slain (2:20).
This is the perspective that gives abiding peace to the seer. And further:
In what way can he who knows this Self to be indestructible, eternal, 
birthless and imperishable, slay or cause to be slain? (2:21).
Do not dream: 
know
. Then you will be free from the compulsions and anxieties 
of the world-dream.
When we cling to these compulsions and anxieties, birth, life, and death are 
agonies raking us like hooks and whips. But what are they in actuality? Krishna 

says:
Even as a man casts o
"
 his worn-out clothes and then clothes himself in 
others which are new, so the embodied casts o
"
 worn-out bodies and then 

enters into others which are new (2:22).
How simple. And how e
"
ortless. It is our clinging, our grasping, that torments 
us. For though we do not realize it, aversion and distaste are also graspings. To 

push a thing away we have to touch it, to come into contact with it. And once 
touched it works its e
"
ect on us.
Although Krishna is speaking of the experiences of physical birth and death, the 
same is true of any kind of ÒbecomingÓ or dissolving of both external and internal 

experiences. The same is true of the various states of consciousness that we pass 
through on the way to the goal of perfected awareness. We should pass into and out 

of them as easily as changing our clothing, neither clinging to them nor tearing 
them away from us.
Easefulness is the keynote of genuine spiritual development. There are no 
traumas, no cataclysms or sweeping shake-ups in the path to God. Such things only 

take place in the prisons of illusions. If they do occur we may know that we are 
either on the wrong path or are walking it in a wrong manner. Spiritual 

hypochondriacs revel in these things, regaling their hearers with lurid accounts of 
how traumatic and cataclysmic every step of Òthe pathÓ has been for them. Their 
dramatic bombastic revelations are symptoms of mental illness, not of progress in 

spiritual life.
Finally, KrishnaÕs statement that Òthe embodied casts o
"
 worn-out bodies and 
then enters into others which are newÓ is an indication of the truth that it is we and 
37
we alone that are always in control. But, like those a
#
icted with short-term 
memory loss, we put ourselves into a situation and then forget we did so, 
attributing it to God, fate, accident, or just about anything but ourselves. Therefore, 
praying to God, engaging in superstitious Ògood luckÓ practices (including much of 

religion), trying to Òcheat fateÓ and suchlike are doomed to failure and frustration. 
WE are the key.
The immutable Self
KrishnaÕs next statement is to be looked into beyond the surface appearance:
This Self by weapons is cut not; this Self by Þre is burnt not; this Self by 
water is wet not; and this Self is by wind dried not (2:23).
First of all, the four factors: weapons, Þre, wind, and water, represent the four 
gross elements, earth, Þre, air and water (ether being the Þfth, most subtle 

element). By the ÒelementsÓ we do not mean material earth, water, Þre, etc., but the 
four types of creative energies that combine to make up all that is material. The 
names given to the elements are merely symbolic of their behavior and e
"
ects. We 

are encased in Þve bodies: annamaya, pranamaya, manomaya, jnanamaya, and 
anandamaya 
koshas
 (coverings). These are the ÒbodiesÓ corresponding to the 
material, biomagnetic, mental, intellectual and will levels of our makeup. These, in 
turn, correspond to the elements of earth, water, Þre, air, and ether. The idea is that 
no matter what our consciousness is encased in or what kind of external force is 
working on us, our true Self, our true nature, cannot be altered in any manner 

whatsoever.
Secondly: cut, burnt, wet, and dried are symbols of being changed, taken from or 
added to (increased or decreased). Since we cannot be altered in any way, anything 

that can be is not our Self. This is the very important teaching known in Sanskrit as 
anatma
Ðthe teaching regarding what is not the Self. Buddha emphasized this greatly, 
and was being completely traditional in doing so. Sadly, those outside India who 
encountered his teachings thought that the term (
anatta
 in Pali) meant there is no 
Self. But the term means not-Self, not no-Self, which would be 
niratma
 or 
niratta
. So 
wherever we see changeÉthat is not the Self. ÒChange and decay all around I see. O 

Thou Who changest not, abide with me.Ó Unfortunately, these words are addressed 
to God, Who is not the problem. What should be sought is the abiding experience 
of our own unalterable Self. For Krishna sums it up in this way:
This Self cannot be cut, burnt, wetted, nor dried. This primeval Self is 
eternal, all-pervading, and immovable (2:24).
The Self is the inmost reality and can only be known at the core of our beingÐ
which is the Self. Yet it pervades all that we call Òus,Ó enlivening all our body-levels 
in the same way the proximity of Þre creates warmth in inert substances and the 
light of the sun stimulates the growth of living things. This is a basic concept of 

Sankhya philosophy. Primordial energy has no motive power of its own, but the 
proximity of Spirit causes it to ÒliveÓ and move. It is with us as it is with God. The 
presence of God causes the primal matter to manifest as all creation; and it is the 
38
presence of our spirit that causes our own private prakriti to manifest as a chain of 
ever-evolving births and deaths. Self-knowledge is the apex of our evolution, after 
which our prakriti becomes a mirror, silent and motionless, no longer moving, but 
reßecting only consciousness itself.
39
Practical Self-Knowledge
Krishna has been telling Arjuna a great deal about the Self, and will continue to 
do so for several more verses. Yet he now explains that:
Unmanifest, unthinkable, this Self is called unchangeable. Therefore, 
knowing this to be such, you should not mourn (2:25).
ÒI only believe in what I can seeÓ is one of the silliest things anyone can say. The 
ÒIÓ spoken about in this statement is never seenÐnot even by the speaker! Some 
years back I read in an Eastern Christian magazine about an incident that took place 

in Yugoslavia. A Communist indoctrinator was mocking the ideas of God and the 
soul, saying that they could not be seen or touched and so did not exist. When he 
stopped speaking a man stood up and said: ÒI have a question for everyone who has 

been listening to you.Ó Then he turned to the assembly and asked: ÒCan you see 
this manÕs mind?Ó ÒNo,Ó they responded. ÒThen it does not exist, and to think so is 
superstition. So forget everything he just saidÐit was only a combination of physical 

forces without any meaning at all.Ó Somehow the ÒwisdomÓ of materialism 
evaporated before good sense.
The truth is this: the more easily seen and dealt with by the body and the 
senses, the less real a thing is. And the less it is seen and dealt with by the body and 

the senses, the more real it is. The absolute realities of God and the spirit are, then, 
completely beyond the reach of the senses or the mind. Although many attempts 

are made in religion to infer or deduce their existence, they are vain and in time 
lead to annihilation of themselves. Every ÒproofÓ set forth by limited reason to 
establish the existence of God and the spirit can be turned right back around and 

used to disprove themÐthat is the nature of any intellectual proposition. This is why 
the most e
"
ective atheist-materialists usually have a strong religious background. 
Both Stalin and Lenin studied for the Eastern Orthodox priesthood. Intuition alone 
can give us a shadowy hint of the presence of the Divine Spirit. And we must 
progress beyond intuition to direct experience of these fundamental realities. That 
is what Yoga is all about. Without a viable sadhana, these things cannot be known, 

and in time the intuition of their existence will be eroded and even lostÐeither in 
this life or in a future birth.
God, the Paramatman, and the individual spirit, the jivatman, are beyond this 
world, beyond all experience or appearance. Yet they are ÒbehindÓ the veil of 

external existence, immanent within it. It is their presence that causes all the forms 
of evolutionary change. It is true that we can see the e
"
ects of spirit, but there is no 

way reason can prove they really emanate from spirit and are not self-caused. Only 
those who are clear at the centerÐthe core of their being which is spiritÐcan see 
God, as Jesus said: ÒBlessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GodÓ (Matthew 

5:8). The word translated ÒpureÓ is 
katharos
, which means to be absolutely clear, 
free of all obstruction or extraneous matter or elements. 
Kardia
, translated Òheart,Ó 
40
means the core or center of something, and in Greek was a symbolic term for the 
spirit which is, of course, the absolute center of our beingÐ
is
 our being, actually.
We cannot see or think about our true Self, but we can enter into it and live in 
itÐlive 
as
 it. Then all change and uncertainty will cease. As Krishna says a little later 
on: ÒIn tranquility the cessation of all sorrows is produced.Ó Knowing this, we 
should not grieve over present troubles but look forward in hope to their cessation 
forever.
41
Perspective on Birth and Death
Inconsistency in outlook
Just because something is the truth does not mean that we can easily grasp or 
accept it, however sincere we may be in our truth-seeking. How many years can go 
by without our fully grasping that someone we dearly love has left their bodyÐthey 

are so living to us. Sometimes we experience intense grief at their departure and 
absence, and at the same time really cannot feel that they are no longer with us. 
After all, we are in this earth plane because we are completely irrationalÐespecially 

on the subconscious and emotional levels. When my miracle-working grandmother 
died, I grieved and shed tears over the loss every single day for one year, and yet 
only on the anniversary day of her departure did I fully come to realize that she was 

gone! In my heart I could not believe that I would not Þnd her in her house if I 
would just go there. So an intellectual understanding about birth and death does 
not help a great deal. If the facts will not take root in our minds, then we at least 

need a better perspective on things. So Krishna is now explaining to Arjuna how he 
should consider these matters even if he cannot take in the truth that birth and 
death are mere appearances only. He continues:
And moreover, if you think this Self to have constant birth and death, even 
then you should not mourn (2:26).
Even if we consider birth and death to be real (which they are, as impressions in 
the mind), even then we should have no sorrow because:
Of the born, death is certain; of the dead, birth is certain. Therefore, over 
the inevitable you should not grieve (2:27).
In the West, the brilliant Stoic philosopher Epictetus counseled his students to 
study their lives and environment and determine what lay within the scope of their 

power to inßuence, produce, or eliminate. Having done this, they should put 

everything else out of their minds as things they should not even worry about. Birth 
and death are certainly major elements to cultivate indi
"
erence to.
The truth of things can be postponed or avoided for a while. But truth is our 
very nature, and must eventually be faced and undergone. So how long will we 

continue to violate it with more illusions?
The wisdom of Buddha
How rare are those who never concede to making demands for more fantasies to 
make them ÒhappyÓ! Buddha was one such, and even after these thousands of years 
there are still many (including some who call themselves Buddhists) who consider 
that his utter realism was pessimism or indi
"
erence to peopleÕs feelings.
One incident that is not popular is his dealing with this subject of death and 
grief. A young woman whose infant had died came to Buddha and begged him to 

bring her child back to life. Buddha told her to go into a nearby town and bring him 
42
some rice from a family in which no one had ever died. She hastened into the town 
and spent the day going from house to house with her request. Everywhere she was 
told the same thing: death continually came to members of the family. In the 
evening she returned to Buddha and, bowing, thanked him for showing her the folly 

of her request. Having understood the universality of physical death, she saw that 
her grief and her request were based on ignoranceÐignorance which was now 
dispelled. John Hay, in his poem ÒThe Law of DeathÓ told it this way:
And then from door to door she fared,

To ask what house by Death was spared.
Her heart grew cold to see the eyes
Of all dilate with slow surprise:

ÒKilvani, thou hast lost thy head;
Nothing can help a child thatÕs dead.
There stands not by the GangesÕ side

A house where none hath ever died.Ó
Thus, through the long and weary day,
From every door she bore away
Within her heart, and on her arm,
A heavier load, a deeper harm.

By gates of gold and ivory,
By wattled huts of poverty,
The same refrain heard poor Kilvani,

The living are few, the dead are many.
The evening cameÐso still and ßeetÐ
And overtook her hurrying feet.
And, heartsick, by the sacred lane
She fell, and prayed the god again.

She sobbed and beat her bursting breast:
ÒAh, thou hast mocked me, Mightiest!
Lo I have wandered far and wide;

There stands no house where none hath died.Ó
And Buddha answered, in a tone
Soft as a ßute at twilight blown,
But grand as heaven and strong as death
To him who hears with ears of faith:

ÒChild, thou art answered. Murmur not!
Bow, and accept the common lot.Ó
43
Kilvani heard with reverence meet,
And laid her child at BuddhaÕs feet.
Swami Kaivalyananda, a disciple of Yogiraj Shyama Charan Lahiri, once told 
Mukunda Lal Ghosh, later to be Paramhansa Yogananda, about miraculous healings 
done by his guru. But in conclusion he stated: ÒThe numerous bodies which were 
spectacularly healed through Lahiri Mahasaya eventually had to feed the ßames of 

cremation.Ó So in the end it was all the same: death had its way.
We only torment ourselves with the desire and attempt to postpone or cancel 
the inevitable. Years ago I heard about a hillbilly who spent the entire day in a 

theater, watching the same Þlm over and over. When asked why he did this, he 
answered that he did not like the way it came out and so was waiting for it to end 
di
"
erently. It was his incomprehension of the nature of motion pictures that gave 

him such a foolish hope. And so it is with us.
Earthly life
Beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their middle state 
and again unmanifest in their end. What lamentation can be made over this? 
(2:28).
Like the hillbilly we either do not know the truth about this evanescent life of 
earthly incarnation or we refuse to face it. Our appearances on this earth are but a 

part of our life history. For aeons beyond number we never came into material 

manifestation at all. Then we began doing so, like actors entering a theater and 
moving over the stage in a brief play and then leaving to return home until the next 
performance. Not only are our ÒappearancesÓ but a fraction of our relative 

existence, they are fundamentally unreal. As Krishna implies, life on this earth is 
completely unnatural for us. It is natural to be out of the body, not in it. Yet we 
irrationally cling to it and to our memories of it, even trying to make each life 

duplicate the one before it, not even wanting the drama to develop or evolve. And 
we insanely identify with the ever-changing temporary states, totally forgetting the 
unchanging eternal state that is the only thing real about us. Many metaphysically-

minded people begin heaping up even more folly through striving to remember 
their past lives and attributing full reality to them. Rare are those who utilize the 
memory of past lives to illuminate the problems of the present life so that they all 

can be let go of in order to pass on to higher life beyond any births.
All our ÒlivesÓ are really deathsÐdescent into the worlds of change and decay, 
dreams caused by the fever of samsara, a disease whose cure we must vigorously 

seek and even more vigorously apply. Only when we come to know that we have 
never been born and have never died will we have peace and the cessation of 
sorrow.
44
The Wonder of the Atman
The Seven Wonders of the World
Earlier generations grew up in awe of Richard Haliburton, the archeologist-
explorer whose books read better than most novels, and whose every word was 
true. The most favored book was that in which he told of both the Seven Wonders 

of the modern world and the Seven Wonders of the ancient world. Many readers felt 
a real pang at the thought that they would never see the Colossus of Rhodes, the 
Great Lighthouse of Alexandria, or the Mausoleum. I was one of them for a long 

time. But when I read the Bhagavad Gita my regret was transmuted into optimistic 
awe, for I came to understand that my own Atman was a wonder beyond all earth or 
any other world could o
"
er, and that I was destined to be established in permanent 

and perfect knowledge-experience of that Self.
The One Wonder of India
For thousands of years both readers and hearers in India (and in the West for a 
couple of centuries) have taken inspiration from the story in the Chandogya 
Upanishad about the sage Uddalaka teaching his son Svetaketu about the Self. In 

many ways he demonstrates the existence of the Absolute Self, concluding each 
time with the thrilling words: ÒAll beings have their Self in him alone. He is the 
truth. He is the subtle essence of all. He is the Self. And that, Svetaketu, THAT ART 

THOU.Ó As Sri Aurobindo has observed, even those that do not have direct 
knowledge of the truth of these words yet are inexplicably moved upon hearing 
them, knowing subliminally of their truth. Stirred to their real depths, the wise of 

many ages have been set on the path of Self-discovery by UddalakaÕs assurance that 
they, too, are THAT.
Knowledge and ignorance
The fact is that there is only one real problem for us as human beings: ignorance 
of the Self. And the solution is obvious: knowledge of the Self. For this reason 
Arjuna could not be swayed by KrishnaÕs exhortations to Þght that were based on 
egocentric factors such as personal disgrace, hope of heavenly reward, social order, 
and such like. This much Arjuna understood. Having revealed this to Arjuna (for 

Krishna had no need to Þnd it out for himself), Krishna went directly to the core 
issue of the Self and stayed there for the remainder of that miracle of wisdom we 
know as the Gita. Like Uddalaka he used many means to convey the single message: 

Know the Self.
The four states of understanding
After his initial exposition of the Self, already considered in previous essays, 
Krishna speaks of the responses human beings have to the teaching about the Self:
45
Some perceive this Self as wondrous, another speaks of it as wondrous, 
another hears of it as wondrous, but even having heard of this Self, no one 
knows it (2:29).
Prabhavananda translates this: ÒThere are some who have actually looked upon 
the Atman, and understood it, in all its wonder. Others can only speak of it as 

wonderful beyond their understanding. Others know of its wonder by hearsay. And 
there are others who are told about it and do not understand a word.Ó
It is intriguing to see how the number four has signiÞcance in many ways in the 
scriptures of India. We usually think of seven as the mystic number (and it is), but 

four also comes into the picture many times, especially in considerations of the 

development of consciousness. For example, there are four castes based on the level 
of the individualÕs consciousness. (The present-day Òcaste systemÓ is an 
unfortunate degeneration based on just about everything but the individualÕs state 

of evolution.) The solar system is said to pass through four ages (yugas) in which 
the general consciousness of humanity ranges from only one-fourth to four-fourths 
of its potential. This numbering is the most important of all considerations, because 

it deals with the unfoldment of consciousness, consciousness being the nature of 
the Self.
Even in the life of Jesus we Þnd this fourfold categorizing of spiritual 
consciousness. Toward the end of his public ministry, in response to his prayer God 

spoke in a great voice from the heavens. In the Gospel of John (12:27-29) we are 
told that those present reacted in four ways: 1) some knew it was the voice of God, 

2) some thought it was the voice of an angel, 3) some did not hear it as words or a 
voice, but thought it was thunder, and 4) some did not hear a thing. If we analyze 
these responses we will Þnd exactly the psychology of the four castes being 

expressed. But let us return to Krishna.
According to Krishna there are four states of awareness in relation to the Self: 1) 
direct knowledge, 2) deep faith and convictionÐan intuition of the SelfÕs reality, 3) 

intellectual comprehension of the ÒtheoryÓ of the Self, and 4) complete non-
comprehension.
Divine knowledge
ÒSome perceive this [Self] as wondrous.Ó In the ultimate sense, to know 
something is to 
be
 something. Although we are always our Selfs and incapable of 
being anything else, because we have fallen into the pit of delusion we are aware of 
and ÒknowÓ just about everything but our Selfs. This is an awesomely horrible 
plight. But Krishna tells us that there are those who have actually regained their 

self-awareness, ÒseenÓ themselves in atmic vision and comprehended what they 
saw, coming to know the Self in the fullest sense.
Divine intuition
ÒAnother speaks of it as wondrous.Ó Since we 
are
 the Self, we obviously know all 
about it on the real level of our being. Evolution consists mainly of development/
46
elaboration of our body vehicles, including the mind, but it also entails a reÞning of 
those vehicles, a transparency in which intuition comes more and more into play. It 
is this which is the real transcendence of the mind (intellect) and entry into true 
knowing. As a prelude to the direct knowing of the Self, the intuition of the Self 

arises and increases, leading the sadhaka onward to that knowing.
Divine understanding
ÒAnother hears of it as wondrous.Ó Before intuition arises, the intellect is 
developed through evolution and becomes capable of grasping the concept of the 
SelfÐinsofar as it can be intellectually grasped. No small degree of evolution is 

required before genuinely intelligent (buddhic) apprehension of the Self is possible. 
Therefore to simply have an intellectual comprehension of the incomprehension of 
the SelfÐto wonder at the truth of the SelfÐis itself a mark of signiÞcant spiritual 

development.
Uncomprehending ignorance
ÒBut even having heard of this [Self], no one knows it.Ó Simply hearing or 
reading about the Self is not knowing the Self, and never can be. This is not a 
matter of intelligence only, but also a matter of evolution of consciousness. I have 

met highly intelligent people who just could not comprehend even the simplest of 
the principles set forth in the Upanishads or the Gita. No matter how I tried to 
make their meaning clear by restating them in di
"
erent ways, they remained 

incapable of even a glimmer of understanding.
For example, one very mentally active and intelligent man was thoroughly 
ßummoxed by my statement that as long as we see life with the two eyes of duality 

we will wander in confusion and delusion, but as soon as we begin to see with the 
one eye of spiritual intuition we begin to understand our life and our selves. Again 
and again he asked me to explain, but he never got it in the least. He was very 

frustrated, at least realizing that I was making sense and the lack was on his part, 
but he never managed.
On another occasion one of the monks of our monastery was speaking to a 
Fundamentalist Protestant minister. The monk told him that we believed everyone 

could become exactly what Jesus was. Over and over he asked the monk to explainÐ
he was not rejecting the idea: he just could not grasp it. And he never did.
As I have said, it is a matter of evolution, for non-comprehension is even lower 
than a mistaken understanding.
Sometimes, however, incomprehension is a matter of negativity. The Tibetan 
Buddhists say that stupidity is a Òdaughter of hell.Ó Evolution of intelligence is a 
requisite, but it is certainly true that without puriÞcation of the intellect, however 
evolved, no understanding of higher spiritual realities is possible.
The four castes
Returning to the subject of caste, we can now realize in the light of KrishnaÕs 
47
exposition that Shudras are those who are servants to materiality and ignorance, 
Vaishyas are those who have an intellectual understanding of the possibility of their 
betterment, Kshatriyas are those who, being close to apprehension of the Self, are 
able to intuit the truth of the Self while aware of their limitation, and Brahmins are 

those who see and know the Self. This is the sum of the entire matter.
48
The Indestructible Self
In the Þrst chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, which sets the stage for its other 
seventeen chapters, we are told that: ÒKrishna brought the chief chariot to stand in 
the midst of the two armies. Thus facing Bhishma, Drona, and all the rulers of the 
earth, Krishna said: Behold, Arjuna, these Kurus assembled here. Arjuna saw 

standing there fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, 
grandsons as well as friends, fathers-in-law and companions in the two armies. In 
both of them he saw all relatives arrayed. Then Þlled with profound pity, 

despondingÓ (1:24-28), he spoke, Þlled with grief at the thought of the impending 
death of those he respected so highly and loved so dearly.
At Þrst Krishna attempts to incite Arjuna to battle by speaking of duty and 
honor. This does not succeed, so he quickly passes on to the subject of the Self from 

which perspective alone could Arjuna truly engage in a righteous war. At one point 
he assures Arjuna:
This embodied Self is eternally indestructible in the body of all. Therefore 
you should not mourn for any being (2:30).
The Self is absolutely immutable. In a sense nothing ever even happens to it. 
Rather, it remains the silent, unchanging witness of all that goes on around itÐbut 
never within it or even with it or near it. In the Þfth chapter Krishna describes the 
enlightened individual as being like a lotus leaf resting, unwetted, on water. This is 

not an ideal for Arjuna to strive for, but is the actual state of all sentient beingsÐ
they are never touched by anything, not even by God since God is the essence of 
their being. To understand that nothing ever really a
"
ects us is an essential insight, 

but the experiencing of it is much better.
The main point of KrishnaÕs statement is that it is unreasonable to mourn or 
grieve for anyone, since nothing has happened to them, however horrendous the 

appearance might be. Nor has anything really happened to us who have witnessed 
it. Not even their death has altered us in any degree.
When we lived in the Anza-Borrego desert we encountered an eccentric man 
who was caretaker of a friendÕs property there. In speaking to us about him she 

commented that he had starred in his own movie for too long a time. That remark 
was both insightful and humorous, but it happens to be the truth about all of us. 

We are sitting in the Òsense-surroundÓ theater completely absorbed in the movies 
of our many lives and completely identifying with the spectacle. None of it is 
ultimately real, yet we su
"
er terribly. How is this? Unhappily, rather than ÒlosingÓ 

our minds we have ÒfoundÓ them, become immersed in them, and now identify 
with them totally. All that happens to our body and mind we think is happening to 
us. And so we pass through a panorama of mistaken responses to the passing show.
Both birth and death are illusions, but that makes them no less painful if we 
identify with that which undergoes those changes. We must not just intellectually 
49
understand this, we must actually separate ourselves from the illusory contact and 
be what we already are: the indestructible Self. Then all su
"
ering ceasesÐsu
"
ering 
that never really existed except as a mirage caused by non-existent phenomena. For 
Krishna assures us: ÒYou dream you are the doer, you dream that action is done, 

you dream that action bears fruit. It is your ignorance, it is the worldÕs delusion that 
gives you these dreamsÓ (5:14. Prabhavananda translation).
50
ÒHappy The WarriorÓ
Happy?
Seeing and hearing the agony of Arjuna, Krishna smiled as he began the 
discourse we are analyzing. He smiled because he knew the truth of things, 
including the fact that Arjuna was about to come to the same understanding.
Literal and symbolic
Symbolism is an essential part of any viable spiritual tradition, and Indian 
spiritual lore is heavily symbolic, so much so that many begin to treat everything 
about it as a symbol. Christianity inherited this both from India and from Jewish 
philosophers such as Philo, to whom just about everything was symbolic. Origen 

refused to consider the Gospels as literal historical accounts and at one place in his 
writings mentions what a great di
!
culty the Christian encounters if he believes 
that Jesus rode into Jerusalem seated on a donkey. He does not explain what the 

di
!
culty would be and I have never known anyone who could even guess at his 
meaning.
For us who are sitting with Arjuna listening to KrishnaÕs revelation, the Gita 
must be seen as simultaneously literal and symbolic. If we arbitrarily decide when 

the Gita is literal and when it is symbolic we will not only cut our understanding of 
its message by half, we will also confuse ourselves. It is also very necessary that we 

apply the GitaÕs statements to the physical, mental (higher mental, actually), and 
spiritual levels of our life. Otherwise we will miss many applications of its wisdom.
Why not you?
I would like to pause here for a serious statement. It is gratifying to me that you 
are reading my ideas on the meaning of the Bhagavad Gita. However it is my hope 
that you will read many commentaries on the GitaÐthose of past generations as well 
as the contemporary ones. This is because the Gita is as inÞnite as the 
Consciousness that speaks through it. Therefore a single human being cannot 

possibly encompass all the meanings of the Gita. Nor can the commentaries of 
several do so, either. So keep on reading!
You, too, need to study the Gita directly and gain your own insights. Jesus said 
that Òevery scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a 

man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and 
oldÓ (Matthew 13:52). The wisdom of the past is still wisdom, and the wisdom of 

the present is equally wise. Both are needed. The word 
kainos
 here translated ÒnewÓ 
also has the connotation of freshness, the idea being that new insights can continue 

to be brought forthÐand why not by you?
Mental viewpoint
51
Now having said all this about literal and symbolic I would like to analyze the 
next few verses from the psychological angle since it is the mind-intellect which 
inßuences both the physical and the spiritual life. As Sri Ramakrishna often 
observed, ÒThe mind is everything.Ó
The war
Anyone who wishes to better himself in any way faces the necessity of e
"
ortÐ
even struggle. The war of the Bhagavad Gita takes place internally, is a spiritual 
struggle to the death of ignorance and the ascendance of illumination. Many never 
engage in the war, frightened away by the prospect of the sacriÞce and strife. Those 

engaged in the spiritual war often would like to avoid it or mitigate it or somehow 
work out a cease-Þre. They commit themselves to sure defeat by such a wish if they 
follow it through.
We, however, wish to succeed, to win the war. So let us listen to what Krishna 
tells us as we, too, quail before the prospects of battle.
It is our duty and our nature
And just considering your swadharma, you should not waver, for truly to a 
kshatriya there is nothing greater to Þnd than a righteous battle (2:31).
I plan to wait until the fourth chapter, where Krishna tells us that God is the 
originator of the four castes, to go into the subject of caste in any depth, so here I 
want only to point out that although translators may use the expression Òcaste 

dutyÓ in translating this verse, the actual Sanskrit says 
swadharma
, which is 
something far di
"
erent. That, too, is best saved for an in-depth essay later on, but 

right now it must be made clear that swadharma means Òself-dharma,Ó the action 

which is in perfect accordance with our present state of evolution, which may be 
spoken about in terms of caste. Yet, the higher meaning is the dharma of the Self, 
the action that will best lead to the knowledge of our eternal being. So the purpose 

of this verse is to show that the inner struggle for enlightenment is twofold: a duty 
and an expression/manifestation of our true nature.
Since people are usually out of touch with who they really are, another kind of 
appeal is needed, and duty/responsibility is the most frequently and reasonably 

invoked. On the other hand, the spiritual struggle is our duty because it is our 
nature to ascend, to evolve. So they really are the same thing in the context of the 

Gita.
A problematic word
Now we need to go back a bit to a word whose analysis at that time might have 
distracted us from the main thrust of the GitaÕs message in that part. 
ÒThe Holy Lord said: Whence has come this faintheartedness of yours in the 
time of danger; ignoble [unaryan], not leading to heaven, but to disgrace?Ó (2:2). 
We must look at that word, 
unarya
: unaryan: Ònot aryan.Ó
Because the monsters who marched under the Nazi banner (which bore the 
52
sacred symbol of the swastika that was thereby dishonored and made to bear an 
odious connotation in the West) plagiarized the Sanskrit word 
arya(n)
, it has 
become usual for us outside India to use the expressions ÒVedic religionÓ or 

ÒSanatana [Eternal] DharmaÓ in reference to the spiritual tradition of primeval 

India. These are accurate and bona Þde expressions, of course, but Arya Dharma is 
the oldest expression and has a unique value. So important was arya in the 
vocabulary of the ancient Indian sages that India itself was known as Aryavarta, the 

Land of the Aryas, for the people living there were commonly known as Aryas. 
Buddha used the term a great deal. Although his teachings are referred to as ÒThe 
Noble Eightfold PathÓ or ÒThe Four Noble Truths,Ó what he really said was ÒThe 

Aryan
 Eightfold PathÓ and ÒThe Four 
Aryan
 Truths.Ó This is not without real 
signiÞcance, so we cannot avoid looking at the word, no matter how distasteful its 

use in twentieth-century racial bigotry and genocide has made it for contemporary 

sensitivities. Hitler liked to toss around ÒholyÓ and ÒGodÓ in his rantsÐas well as 
ÒjusticeÓ and ÒfreedomÓÐbut that in no way invalidates them. Evil as he was, he did 
not have the power to corrupt or degrade such an ancient term of honorÐonly to 

condition our response to it. And we should not let his madness prevail in our 
personal reactions.
Arya comes from the root word 
ri
, which means Òto rise upward.Ó A legitimate 
translation is Òone who strives upward.Ó This gives us the whole idea about 

wherever it is used. An aryan is one who puts forth real e
"
ort to improve himself in 
any area of life. Naturally arya was most Þttingly applied by the philosophers of 

India to spiritual and personal life. The word ÒnobleÓ is too inactive and can be 
interpreted passively, such as in thinking that a person is born noble or made noble 
by the declaration of another. An arya is one who labors to rise, exemplifying the 

saying that a diamond is a piece of coal that never gave up. Truly a saint is a sinner 
that never gave up, as Yogananda often said. In other words, an arya is one on the 
path to sainthood as well as one who has attained it.
In very ancient Indian texts humanity is divided into two classes: the aryas and 
the vritras, or dasyus. Vritra means Òone who covers upÓ in the sense of burrowing 

into the darkness of the earth, of material consciousness and involvement. Dasyus 

are slavesÐslaves of materiality living in willing servitude to lower life and 
consciousness. Aryas, on the other hand, strive upward into the light, into freedom.
No hesitation
Arya Dharma, then, is the course of action an arya follows to become a perfected 
being. SpeciÞcally, it is the mode of life and thought outlined in the Upanishads and 
the Bhagavad Gita. An arya is one who responds to the inner and upward call 
without hesitation. For there is nothing nobler than the struggle for higher degrees 
of life and awareness.
Happy are the kshatriyas to whom heavenÕs gate opens when by good 
fortune they encounter such a battle (2:32).
Truly happy are those who engage in such a battle, for it opens the door to 
53
InÞnite Consciousness, the true Òheaven.Ó
Now if you shall not undertake this dharmic engagement, then having 
avoided your swadharma and glory, you shall incur evil (2:33).
Sanskrit words have many meanings, and it is good to consider all of them, since 
the sages packed their words with many relevant aspects.
Dharmyam sanghraman
 also means Òdharmic assembly.Ó In the spiritual texts of 
India great emphasis is put on 
satsanga
 which, though literally meaning Òthe 
company of truth,Ó is always considered to mean Òcompany with the wise.Ó Sri 
Ramana Maharshi said that for success in yoga, satsanga was an absolute essential, 
and Sri Ramakrishna said that spiritual life is simply impossible without continual 

association with other seekers for truthÐand, hopefully, with those that have found 
it.
It is interesting that Krishna says avoiding the struggle for righteousness is an 
abandoning of both swadharma and glory (
kirtim
). Now we are able to easily 
consider that we have a higher duty, but usually forget that we are also glorious 
spiritual beings, however much ignorance may have covered up our glory. Human 

beings do not need to be told that they are miserable, awful, sinners, but the truth: 
they are glorious beings who are tragically caught in the net of Òsin,Ó but freedom is 
not only possible, it is inevitable, for it is their true nature. We do not need God to 

forgive us our sins. We need to awaken, stand up, and shake them o
"
 like the 
barnacles they are, and walk onward in strength and freedom.
The word translated ÒevilÓ is 
papam
, which is often translated as Òsin,Ó but it 
means demeritÐas opposed to merit (
punyam
). We can think of it as dirt or dust that 

obscures a pane of glass or a mirror. It in no ways means something that God has 
forbidden or which he Òhates.Ó Rather, it is a self-injury that inhibits and limits us. 

It is a bond that takes away our freedom. Consequently, we are free to choose which 
we want, otherwise we will be only servants and slaves. Only those who are free to 
be foolish have the freedom to be wise. This is the basis of the Òlive and let liveÓ 

attitude of the East that so frustrates the missionary from the West.
Self-disgrace
If we turn away from this holy conßict we will be denying our nature and 
betraying and disgracing no one but ourselves.
And people will forever tell of your undying infamy. For the renowned, 
such disgrace is worse than dying (2:34).
The word translated ÒdisgraceÓ is 
akirtim
Ðabsence of our glory, loss of contact 
with what and who we really are. This is a death of consciousness much worse than 
physical death, for it can persist throughout countless incarnations.
The great car-warriors will believe you abstain from delight in battle 
through fear. And among those who have thought much of you, you shall 

come to be lightly esteemed. Your enemies shall speak of you many things 
that should not be said, deriding your adequacy. What, indeed, could be a 
greater su
"
ering than that? (2:35-36).
54
Yes, it is a painful thing to have others speak ill of us and despise us, but how 
much more painful it is to despise ourselves and consider ourselves to be degraded 
and unworthy. There are many sad forms of humanity, but none is sadder than 
those who have turned away from higher life and spent a lifetime in shame and 

regret, condemned by none other than themselves.
A great secret
In material life we are often promised great beneÞts if we will only do what the 
promisers want us to do, the implication being that if we do not obey we will lose 
or be denied the beneÞts. But Krishna has a very di
"
erent thing to say. Happiness in 

both this world and the next are guaranteed to the yogi. 
If you are slain you shall attain heaven; if you conquer you shall enjoy the 
earth. Therefore, stand up resolved to Þght (2:37).
In the sixth chapter Arjuna is going to present to Krishna the usual manipulative 
and resentful view of religionists: is not one who fails in or abandons spiritual life 

lost and hopeless? Krishna replies: ÒTruly there is no loss for him either here on 

earth or in heaven. No one who does good goes to misfortuneÓ (6:40). And this is 
true in the inner struggle. If we literally die before winning the battle or are 
overcome in the battle and ÒslainÓ by the enemy, we shall still reap profound 

beneÞt. The intensely positive karma generated by meditation will result in our 
rising to high spiritual realms after death and enjoying its fruits there. Then, when 
we are reborn we will reap the good karma in the form of coming into the orbit of 

meditational knowledge and resume our practice. If on the other hand we persevere 
and win the ultimate victory we shall Þnd life here on earth totally transÞgured to a 
glory presently unimagined by us. In his book 
Practice of Karma Yoga
 the great Master 
Sivananda of Rishikesh expressed it this way:
When I surveyed from Ananda Kutir, Rishikesh,

By the side of the Tehri Hills, only God I saw.
In the Ganges and the Kailash peak,
In the famous Chakra Tirtha of Naimisar also, only God I saw.
In tribulation and in grief, in joy and in glee,
In sickness and in sorrow, only God I saw.

In birds and dogs, in stones and trees,
In ßowers and fruits, in the sun, moon and stars, only God I saw.
Like camphor I was melting in his Þre of knowledge,
Amidst the ßames outßashing, only God I saw.
My Prana entered the Brahmarandhra at the Moordha,

Then I looked with GodÕs eyes, only God I saw.
I passed away into nothingness, I vanished,
55
And lo, I was the all-living, only God I saw.
I enjoyed the Divine Aisvarya, all GodÕs Vibhutis,
I had Visvaroopa Darshan, the Cosmic Consciousness, only God I saw.
Sri Ramakrishna said that to the enlightened yogi the whole world that now is a 
sea of su
"
ering becomes Òa mart of joy.Ó A Buddhist mystic wrote: ÒI walk through 
this world and no one guesses that Paradise is within [me].Ó Is it any wonder then 

that Krishna concludes: ÒStand up, resolved to ÞghtÓ?
Even moreÉ
Krishna continues with even more astonishing facts, underlining the truth that 
the Gita is not only unique among the scriptures of India, it is 
suprem
e. For next he 
says:
Considering pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat the same, 
then engage in battle. Thus you shall not incur evil (2:38).
Talk about Blessed Assurance!
Meditation deals only with the ever-changing, ever-mutating levels of our being. 
As Patanjali says (Yoga Sutras 1:2), yoga is the entering into the state where these 

levels no longer change or even move, but become transformed into a perfect mirror 

of spirit. This and this alone is Self-realization. But until then what a bumpy ride! 
This being so, we must adopt the perspective Krishna presents: Òpleasure and pain, 
gain and loss, victory and defeat, are all one and the same.Ó That is, they are all 

merely shifting sands, having no stable reality whatsoever. They are but fever 
dreams, delirium from which yoga is intended to awaken us.
Yogis must take their true Self very seriouslyÐeven reverently. But they must 
never take the antics of their SelfÕs ÒwrappingsÓ seriously at all, except to determine 

to tame and transmute them. For the yogi does not shed them and swim away into 
the ocean of InÞnity. He changes them into that ocean and abides in them in 

freedom.
Wherefore let us go into battle and end even the capacity for wrong. Being 
sinners is not at all our nature, and once we become established in our true Self it 

will be as Saint John wrote: ÒWhosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his 
seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of GodÓ (I John 3:9). 
The Gita clearly shows the way to such an attainment.
56
Buddhi Yoga
This buddhi yoga taught by Sankhya is now declared to you, so heed. 
Yoked to this buddhi yoga, you shall avoid the bonds of karma (2:39).
Sankhya
Since Sankhya is the philosophical basis of the Bhagavad Gita, we will be talking 
about it quite a bit. For now, here is 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
Õs deÞnition of Sankhya: 
ÒOne of the six orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy whose originator was the 
sage Kapila, Sankhya is the original Vedic philosophy, endorsed by Krishna in the 
Bhagavad Gita (2:39; 3:3, 5; 18:13, 19). Also, the second chapter of the Gita is 
entitled 
Sankhya Yoga.
 The 
Ramakrishna-Vedanta Wordbook
 says: ÔSankhya postulates 
two ultimate realities, Purusha and Prakriti, declaring that the cause of su
"
ering is 
manÕs identiÞcation of Purusha with Prakriti and its products. Sankhya teaches that 
liberation and true knowledge are attained in the supreme consciousness, where 

such identiÞcation ceases and Purusha is realized as existing independently in its 
transcendental nature.ÕÓ
Not surprisingly, then, Yoga is based on the Sankhya philosophy.
Buddhi yoga
Buddhi is the intellect, understanding, and reason. It is not just the thinking 
mind, it is the understanding mind, the seat of intelligence and wisdom. Buddhi 

Yoga, then, is the Yoga of Intelligence which later came to be called Jnana Yoga, the 
Yoga of Knowledge. We have four levels of being, and the buddhi (also called the 

jnanamaya kosha) is one of the highest. So a buddhi yogi has his consciousness 
centered in the higher levels of his being. And he uses his buddhi to extend that 
yoga even higher into that level which is virtually indistinguishable from spirit. 

From then on Self-realization is assured. Yoga and Sankhya are inseparable, so 
buddhi yoga involves meditation as its paramount aspect. A Buddha is a successful 
buddhi yogi. Unprejudiced reading of the Pali Sutras of Buddhism will reveal that 

Buddha was not only an Aryan, he was a classical Sankhya philosopher, a buddhi 
yogi. Anyone who wishes to follow Buddha must be the same, just as anyone who 
wishes to follow Christ must follow Sanatana Dharma as found in the Gita. Then 

they, too, will be followers of Sankhya and practicers of Yoga.
ÒYogaÓ comes from the Sanskrit root 
yuj
, which means to join or connect or even 
to unite in the sense of making many into one. It can also mean to bring together. 

But in the scriptures of India it always is applied in a spiritual sense, meaning both 
union with God and the way by which that union is e
"
ected. Yoga, then is both 
spiritual life and the culmination of spiritual life. Yoga is union with the Supreme 

Being, or any practice that makes for such union.
According to Krishna, the direct e
"
ect of buddhi yoga is the dissolving of karmic 
57
bonds created by past actions (karmas) and the freeing of the yogi from the 
compulsion to future karma. So we should look at karma itself.
Karma
ÒKarmaÓ comes from the Sanskrit root 
kri
, which means to act, do, or make. It is 
exactly the same as the Latin verb 
ago
 from whose form, 
actus
, we get our English 
words act and action. Both verbs are all-purpose wordsÐthat is, they can be applied 
in many situations to express the idea of many forms of action both mental and 
physical. This is important to know so we can realize that karma covers the entire 
range of human action, whatever its character.
Karma, then, means any kind of action, including thought and feeling, but it also 
means the e
"
ects of actions. For karma is both action and reaction. Being a 

fundamental principle of existence it may be thought of as the law of causation 

governing action and its e
"
ects in the physical and psychological plane. It extends 
back to the moment of our entry into relative existence and extends forward to the 
moment of our exit from relative existenceÐeven if that exit is a matter of 

transmutation of consciousness rather than external cessation of manifestation in a 
relative form or body.
Psychological yoga
Buddhi yoga is performed for the revelation of divinity, all other beneÞts, 
individual and communal, being secondary. For it is purely psychological, even if 
sometimes expressed outwardly.
First we must be able to intellectually understand the principle and the practice. 
Then if we follow it the result will not be the beneÞt of others or satisfaction with 

ourselves for having done what is right. Instead it will be the breaking of the bonds 
of egoic desire which bind us to the wheel of birth and death and force us to act and 
to reap the results of our actions.
To even conceive of erasing the capacity for desire from our minds is audacious 
to the maximum degree. To strive for it is courageous beyond calculation. No 

wonder a battleÞeld and imminent war is the setting for KrishnaÕs teaching.
We must understand that desirelessness is not a mere absence of desire or 
indi
"
erence or detachment. It is an absolute 
incapacity
 for desire. That is, desire 
cannot arise in the mind (buddhi), conscious or subconscious, of the perfect buddhi 

yogi.
People usually make the same mistake about buddhi yoga that they do about 
PatanjaliÕs Yoga. They think that just not thinking is the state of yoga and just not 

caring is the state of karma yoga. But they are much, much more. Yoga is the state 
in which the mind substance (chitta) has evolved to the point where no 
modiÞcations (vrittis or waves) can arise. Buddhi yoga is the state in which desire 

can no longer arise, being eclipsed by awareness of the spirit-Self. These are high 
ideals virtually beyond our present comprehension, but not beyond our attainment.
58
The safe path
Krishna continues to amaze us. Next he states:
In this no e
"
ort is lost, nor are adverse results produced. Even a little of 
this dharma protects from great fear (2:40).
All e
"
ort is e
"
ectual, and there is no regression from progress attained in this 
yoga. It also protects the yogi from 
mahato bhayat
Ðgreat danger or great fear.
Even to try the path of yoga for a while and then abandon it, or to try it and fail, 
or to follow it and die before making any signiÞcant progressÐall these will result in 

tremendous beneÞt. Not one calorie of expended energy will slip away from us. 
This is incredible, and reveals the profound nature of authentic yoga. Yoga (the real 

thing, that is) inaugurates such a profound change in our entire mode of existence, 
such a deep-reaching extension of our higher will, that it cannot help but come to 
full e
"
ect in time. So powerful is the psychic restructuring accomplished by even a 

little yoga practice that we are permanently changed, as Krishna will expound later.
Even more: no negative e
"
ect can accrue from such yoga. In other endeavors 
failure or abandonment often produce psychic damage, weakening, or loss in some 

form. Not so with this yoga. So mighty is its e
"
ect that even walking away from it 
cannot cancel its positive and inevitable results. Only good can come of our 
attempts. For even a little practice of this yoga will save us from the terrible wheel 

of rebirth and death by at least to some degree breaking the chains of desireÐor 
rather, the weakness and ignorance that render us capable of desire.
The secret of its e
"
ectiveness
In this matter there is a single, resolute understanding. The thoughts of 
the irresolute are many-branched, truly endless (2:41).
In the practice of yoga there is only one ideal: liberation of the spirit (moksha). 
Nothing else can be a motive. It is like threading a needle. The thread cannot have 
Þbers sticking out, otherwise it cannot be put through the needleÕs eye. In the same 

way the mind must be focused on the single purpose: freedom in union with the 
Divine. Many types of actions may be engaged in and many goals may be aimed for 
or achieved. Yet, to the yogi they are nothing in themselves. The Þnal result alone 

matters and is ever before his inner eye.
It is much like the rays of the sun. They can be very hot in the summer, but if 
even in the winter they are focused by means of a magnifying or burning glass they 

will cause any ßammable object to catch Þre.
The narrower the point of a weight, the more pressure is produced. A brick 
weighing a pound or two will cause no discomfort if held in the hand. But if the 

corner of the brick is brought to bear on the palm it will be painful.
The idea of both these examples is that the more united or one-pointed the 
mind is made through yoga, the more powerfulÐand therefore e
"
ectiveÐit is.
Single purpose
To lack this single-mindedness in relation to moksha is disastrous to the yogi. 
59
This cannot be overemphasized, because yoga is nothing less than the intense form 
of liberating sadhana Krishna envisions and which impels him to say: ÒThe 
thoughts of the irresolute are many-branched, truly endless.Ó Lost in the labyrinth 
of many goals and focusing on a multitude of objects, the aspiring yogi becomes lost 

in confusion and frustration. KrishnaÕs picture of such a person was presented by 
the Canadian humorist Stephen Leacock when he wrote about a man who leapt on 
his horse Òand rode madly o
"
 in all directions.Ó In the Bible several times people are 

urged to walk straight forward without turning to right or left. (Proverbs 4:27; 
Deuteronomy 5:32, 28:14; Joshua 1:7) The meaning is the same as KrishnaÕs.
Our slogan should ever be: Go Forward!
60
Religiosity Versus Religion
Seeing should not always be believing
ÒAll that glitters is not goldÓ is especially true in the realm of religion. I can 
never hear that adage without remembering a walk I once took with the Russian 
Orthodox (OCA) Archbishop of Chicago. I was spending the weekend with him as I 

usually did at that time, and we were just wandering around aimlessly in the pre-
spring weather, getting rather far from his small apartment next door to the 
renowned Holy Trinity Cathedral.
As we walked along, suddenly to our right loomed a huge church. It was painted 
a dark blue in the tradition of the Ukraine and topped with immense sparkling gold 

onion domes. At the peak of the roof in front was a gigantic Russian-style triple-bar 

cross, also covered in gold leaf.
ÒOh, look!Ó I exclaimed while pointing. ÒAn Orthodox church.Ó

The archbishop looked at me reproachfully. ÒAll that glitters is not gold,Ó he 
said. ÒGo see.Ó And he waved his hand toward the structure. So over I went and 
found by reading the sign by the door that it indeed was not an Orthodox churchÐ
not at all. ÒYou must be careful,Ó was the laconic admonition I received upon 

returning to the bishop. ÒDo not believe your eyes all the time.Ó
This is very much true in the world of religion. All that looks godly is not 
necessarily godly. Often the opposite. Speaking of the religionists of his day, Saint 

Paul simply said: ÒThey have a zeal of God, but not according to 
knowledgeÓ (Romans 10:2).
Just because we believe in God (or at least in our concept of God) and are 
sincere and motivated means little in the sphere of the spirit. Rather, it is 

imperative that our religion be Òaccording to knowledge.Ó Regarding this Krishna 
now says:
Real religion
The ignorant, delighting in the word of the Veda, proclaim this ßowery 
speech: ÒThere is nothing elseÓ (2:42).
This verse may surprise us, especially since the Vedas are usually spoken of with 
highest reverence. But the truth is that there has been a great deal of progress in 
Indian philosophy over the past centuries since Krishna spoke these words.
The supreme teacher of wisdom, Shankara, was born at a time when Vedic 
religion was at its lowest ebbÐso much so, that only a small minority even professed 

to follow it, the majority having abandoned its empty and superstitious ritualism 
for the superior spiritual perspective of Buddhism, which rejected the Vedas. 
ShankaraÕs mission was to show that the ritualistic obsession of those who followed 

the karma-kandaÐthe ritual portion of the VedaÐand who taught that Vedic ritual is 
the only path to perfection, were utterly wrong. By his masterly commentaries on 
61
the Brahma (Vedanta) Sutras, the Upanishads, the Gita, and the Yoga Sutras, he 
restored the original teachings of the ancient rishis and saved the very existence of 
Sanatana Dharma.
Today adherents of that Dharma study the Vedas to discover the wisdom hidden 
therein, not to simply recite them in a superstitious manner. Credit must especially 

be given to the nineteenth-centuary reformer, Swami Dayananda Saraswati, for Þrst 
expounding the Vedas as purely spiritual texts that only appear to deal with 

externalities. Yet KrishnaÕs words are still relevant, for throughout the world 
(including India) religious people are following only the external appearances of 
holy scriptures, and are intent only in getting Òthe good things of lifeÓ while in this 

world and going to a ÒheavenÓ after death that is nothing more than a version of the 
earth without the ßaws. Gaining heaven and avoiding hell, getting reward and 
avoiding punishmentÐin other words, greed and fearÐare their motives. The life of 

the spirit simply does not come into it. In fact, Òthere is nothing elseÓ to their 
religion but their selÞsh purposes.
A proÞle of ignorance
Krishna has already told us that the sole purpose of yoga is the realization of the 
Self and the liberation that produces. It is not hard to conceive that this should also 
be the intent of religion, but it rarely is. For, lacking true knowledge and wisdom, 
the various religions set forth ways and means that are oriented toward just about 
everything material and egoic, not toward knowledge of the Self or the means to 

attain it. Just the opposite, they push their followers further into the mire of 
material consciousness, even promising them eternal physical embodiment after a 
mythical resurrection from the dead: a resurrection into matter instead of 

resurrection into spirit!
I do not mean to be pointing the Þnger only at Western religion. The popular 
religion of the East is even more adept at turning words of wisdom into nonsenseÐ

and very cleverly and plausibly, too. To gauge the truth of this assertion, read the 
Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita and then take a broad look at contemporary 
Indian religion, and even yoga, in their popular forms. Are they the same? Almost 

never, no matter how much the Upanishads and Gita may be invoked by those 
whose entire religious practices are contrary or extraneous (irrelevant) to the 
philosophy of the ancient sages. This is a very serious and unfortunate situation.
Very often those who want to follow the way of the Gita and the Upanishads are 
deßected from that path by the very ones who claim to teach it and whom they trust 

as viable authorities. As Swami PrabhavanandaÕs translation puts it: ÒThose who 

lack discrimination may quote the letter of the scripture, but they are really denying 
its inner truth.Ó Krishna outlines the character and methods of such misleaders.
Those of desire-Þlled natures, intent on heaven, o
"
ering rebirth as actionsÕ 
fruit, performing many and various rites, are aimed at the goal of enjoyment 

and power (2:43).
Desire-Þlled. 
I must confess that these words of Krishna take me back to the 
62
religion of my childhood. I was fortunate enough to be raised in a spiritually serious 
church. The theology was full of holes and absurd in many (most) aspects, but the 
attitude was right on the beam: ÒKnow ye not that the friendship of the world is 
enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of 

GodÓ (James 4:4). We understood that the world spoken of here was not the world 
of divine manifestation but the artiÞcial structure of human society based on the 
egoic ignorance of human beings. To be a friend of the world means to be trapped in 

the realm of time and space, as well as the delusions perpetuated by humanity 
through the ages.
Not only Jesus, but we, too, can say with conÞdence: ÒI am not of the 
worldÓ (John 17:14). For Òthe worldÓ is everything that denies and covers up who 

we really are. It is only rational, then, to heed the admonition: ÒLove not the world, 
neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the 

Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the ßesh, and the lust of 
the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the worldÓ (I John 
2:15-16). We must note that the evils here listed are not said to come from Òthe 

devil,Ó but from the world.
Most religion is sociopathic, and a fundamental trait of a sociopath is denial of 
any responsibility. Everything and everyone is responsible for the sociopathÕs 

problems except himself. Such religion teaches people that some invisible evil 
forces or visible instruments of those forces are what makes them do wrong. But 
Saint John tells us that it is the distortion produced by our association and identity 

with the material and the relative world that impels us to folly.
Speaking of the desire-Þlled teachers of religion, the Apostle says: ÒThey are of 
the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth themÓ ( I John 

4:5). As Krishna states, these religionists are full of desires. Their minds are so 
warped by the fever of these desires, they see themselves and others in a completely 
twisted perspective. Their fundamental impulses are corrupted and lead to 

increasing corruption and ultimate destruction. Their whole way of looking at life is 
hopelessly distorted. And being sociopathic their major intent is to force everyone 
into their world view.
These people are the enemies of both the wise and the foolish. The wise they 
wish to subvert, silence, or destroy lest truth free their dupes from their grasp. On 

the other hand they are determined to keep the ignorant in the dark and in 

servitude to them and their ideas. So vast is the number of the ways in which they 
accomplish this, it is di
!
cult to delineate them. Just take a look around, and 
everything you see will beÐor at least reßectÐtheir wiles and ways. If they were not a 

real danger to the sadhaka, Krishna would not bother to speak about them to 
Arjuna.
Intent on heaven.
 They obsessively grasp at every wisp of the world they see and 
proudly proclaim that their possession is a sign of divine favor, fulÞllment of GodÕs 

will for them, and proof that they are pleasing to God and right in their views. Yet 
they know that earthly gain inevitably ends in loss, and that even before the loss 
63
many defects are encountered and many failures to please or satisfy. This should 
turn any sensible person away from externality to seek the true satisfaction that is 
only found within. But they are not sensible, these dwellers in their own mirage, so 
they do not look within themselves but beyond this world to a heavenly world of 

blessed reward where no defect can mar their enjoyment of astral materiality. 
Consequently their scriptures and their propaganda is Þlled with descriptions of 
bright, beautiful, and happy worlds which will be the reward of those who subscribe 

to their religion and follow their demands.
Although they seem to have their sights on heaven, they are really hankering 
after the things of earth without their innate deÞciencies. So even when they 

supposedly yearn for heaven they are really desiring earth. Some of them are so 
caught in this obsession that they assure their adherents that some time in the 
future they will all rise from the dead in immortal physical bodies and live forever 

on this earth that has been somehow cleansed and perfected.
Of course these delights are not just for the picking up. They are the rewards of 
a pleased and placated divinity. They are the carrots held out to the eager donkeys 

that follow them. 
O
!
ering rebirth. 
Yet, as Krishna points out, all they really o
"
er is Òrebirth as 
actionsÕ fruit.Ó How true this is of most religionists, whether clerical or lay. Desire 

for external material things or situations must come to fulÞllmentÐthis is the 
fundamental law. For karma is thought as well as act. Those who desire aught of the 
world shall inherit the world over and over through continued rebirth. Even desire 

for a heaven that is really only the earth without fault or loss brings us back to the 
earth itself. What to say, then, of the doctrine of the eventual resurrection of the 
body and eternal dwelling in that body? Such an aspiration can only lead to more 

and more births in a physical body, since the heaven of such people is only really 
the earthÐjust as their ÒGodÓ is only themselves.
The great teachers come and proclaim that freedom from karma and rebirth is 
possible. And they show us the way to freedom. But their supposed followers 

instantly degrade the message and build up a religion that only perpetuates the old 
bondage. They promise life and deliver death. ÒA wonderful and horrible thing is 

committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by 
their means; and my people love to have it soÓ (Jeremiah 5:30-31). This is evidence 
that no one religion has a franchise on ignorance and bondage.
Performing many and various rites, are aimed at the goal of enjoyment and power. 
Lord 
Krishna is not speaking only of the people outside India. Throughout the Indian 

subcontinent right now millions are streaming in and out of temples, paying money 

for rituals and blessings that are intended to give them whatever they might want, 
and the three deities of ritualismÐPleasure, Power, and ProsperityÐare diligently 
served by a greedy and materialistic priesthood. Those of us in the West whose 

contact with India has been in the form of visiting Indian spiritual teachers and 
yogis look at all this with a spiritual perspective completely incongruous with the 
truth. ÒLook at those vast and beautiful temples!Ó we enthuse, Òall monuments to 
64
the spiritual aspiration and devotion of the people.Ó Not at all. And almost never. 
Those temples are monuments to greed and superstition as well as fearÐboth fear of 
lacking material things and of incurring the wrath of the skittish deities whose 
scriptural ÒbiographiesÓ are welterings of lust, anger, jealousy, vengefulness, and 

egoÐjust like their devotees.
Our situation is very much like that of some friends of mine who often went to 
India to visit the ashram of a renowned spiritual Þgure. Since they could not 

understand the saintÕs language, every word spoken in the ashram by the saint and 
the visitors seemed embodiments of spirituality, and the Western devotees felt 
ediÞed every moment. But when my friends began picking up some knowledge of 

the language they found that most of the conversation was mundane and inaneÐin 
keeping with the consciousness of the local people who came to the ashram for the 
same motives they went to temples: ÒGive Me!Ó Most devotees in India are devoted 

only to themselves and to the saints as fulÞllers of their desires. As one very famous 
Indian saint said to a crowd of such people: ÒWhen I give you what you want you 
love me, but when I do not give you what you want you hate me.Ó This saint, like 

Jesus, certainly Òknew what was in manÓ (John 2:24-25).
But back to the ritualists. They do indeed prescribe labyrinthine rites whose 
complexity demand a trained and well-paid priesthood. Sometimes the rituals are 

very obvious pullings of the Divine Vending MachineÕs handle, and sometimes they 
are masked with sentimentality passed o
"
 as devotion. One such, for example, is 
the extremely popular Satyanarayan Puja. This takes hours of ritual o
"
erings, 

singing, and recitation of the glories of Vishnu (Narayana). But the glories recited 
are really accounts of all the amazing worldly advantages that have supposedly been 
gained through the ritual itself. In other words, God is not gloriÞed at allÐthe ritual 

is gloriÞed. It is just a Hindu religious version of the old patent remedy shows so 
popular in nineteenth and early twentieth century America, sort of a holy 
infomercial for the puja. To sponsor or attend such an event is considered a mark of 

devotion, but of devotion to what? Or whom? Do they worship the 
gods
 or the 
goods
?
Such purveyors of worldly goods through worldly gods also teach elaborate 
modes of behavior as well to gain the goods. These range from long and arduous 
pilgrimages culminating in more rituals and generous gifts to temples and priests, 
to avoiding things the gods supposedly do not like and always having at hand what 

they do like, to the wearing of emblems honoring the chosen deity, to long 
recitations of the deityÕs praises, to elaborate personal worship of the deity in a 
home shrine, to fasting or abstaining from work on days specially devoted to or 

favored by the deity. Millions of poor Indians fast and worship annually on a day 
whose observance is guaranteed by the popular scriptures to bring lifelong 
prosperity by a single observance. No one seems to notice they stay poor year after 

year. They even assure others that the observance is sure to gain wealth to all who 
engage in it. The same is true of another day whose observance guarantees the 
conception and birth of a son (sorry, girls). So barren and sonless couples devoutly 
65
observe it year after year with no resultÐnot even a resulting skepticism regarding 
its e
!
cacy. The money just keeps rolling inÐor out, depending on which side you 
Þnd yourself. And that is the whole idea, really. For notice that Krishna does not say 
the rituals convey power and pleasure; only that they are supposed to.
The unhappy result
To those attached to enjoyment and power, their minds drawn away by this 
speech, is not granted steady insight in meditation (2:44).
Prabhavananda: ÒThose whose discrimination is stolen away by such talk grow 
deeply attached to pleasure and power. And so they are unable to develop that 
concentration of the will which leads a man to absorption in God.Ó
The above is a remarkable statement. The word 
chetasam
 means both ÒthoughtÓ 
and Òmind.Ó In other words, the extravagant promises of ignorant religion, and the 

scrambling and scratching after the things of this world erode the mind and heart, 
the higher intelligence of human beings, and the power of the Self that is to be set 
forth to reveal itself. That is why he has already urged Arjuna to Òrid yourself of the 

bondage of karmaÓ which leads only to rebirth. ÒThe yogi should Þx his awareness 
constantly on the Self,É without desires or possessionsÓ (6:10).
Krishna outlines to us the hierarchy of control in our own makeup, saying: 
ÒThey say that the senses [indriyas] are superior [to the body], the mind [manasa] 

is superior to the senses, the intellect [buddhi] is superior to the mind, and much 
superior to the intellect is the supreme intelligence [param buddhi]Ó (3:42-43).
Putting forth our mind power to obtain the objects of desire destroys the true 
intelligence of the Self and substitutes the delusions of the ego, and so Òsteady 

insight in meditation is not granted.Ó The Sanskrit literally says, rather awkwardly 

(in English): ÒAnd so the resolute-natured intelligence [buddhi] is not granted in 
meditation [actually: samadhi].Ó That is, the highest state of meditationÐsamadhiÐ
cannot be attained, and the illumined will-power of the buddhi cannot come into 

force. How terrible! Yet there is a hopeful truth here, as well. If we constantly cut 
o
"
 our desires and addiction to their objects, we will develop the will that enables 
us to unite ourselves to Brahman.
ÒThus constantly engaging himself in the practice of yoga, that yogi, freed from 
evil, easily contacting [touching] Brahman, attains boundless happinessÓ (6:28).
66
Perspective on Scriptures
Krishna has more to say about materially oriented scriptures and religion, 
though he just mentions the Vedas:
The three gunas are the domains of the Vedas. Be free from the triad of the 
gunas, indi
"
erent to the pairs of opposites, eternally established in reality, 
free from thoughts of getting and keeping, and established in the Self (2:45).
Again, by Òthe VedasÓ Krishna means the ritualistic portion of the Vedas, the 
karma-kanda in contrast to the Upanishads, the jnana-kanda, which embody the 

highest spiritual wisdom and vision ever set down by human beings. They are really 
two opposing poles, one external and material, the other internal and spiritual. The 
karma-kanda insists that ritual is the only way to spiritual attainment; the 

Upanishads a
!
rm exactly the opposite.
Krishna, continuing the theme of the previous verses, insists that however 
sacred the karma-kanda may claim its rituals to be, they really deal with nothing 

more than Prakriti, material nature, total involvement with which produces only 
ignorance and bondage culminating in rebirth.
The gunas
According to Sankhya philosophy, material energy behaves in three modes, or 
gunas (qualities). We will be considering them at length in Chapter Fourteen, 
which is entitled ÒThe Yoga of the Division of the Three Gunas.Ó For now we need 
only think of them as three forms of material consciousness. Whereas the karma-
kanda does nothing more than entangle its adherents in the three gunas, Krishna 

tells Arjuna that he must overcome the three gunas, that materiality must be 
transcended by entry into consciousness of the Self (Atman). But it is no easy 
matter to be free from the bonds of matter. Rather, the gunas must be overcome. 

This entails a struggle, and not an easy one, either, for Krishna later says to him: 
ÒTruly, this maya of mine made of the gunas is di
!
cult to go beyondÓ (7:14).
The pairs of opposites
The dwandwas, the pairs of opposites, are also material phenomena, such as 
pleasure and pain, hot and cold, light and darkness, gain and loss, victory and 
defeat, love and hatred. Usually people think that the ideal is to eliminate one half 
of a pair and cultivate the other. This is the common attitude of religion throughout 
the world: seek the ÒgoodÓ and avoid the Òbad.Ó But the sages of India discerned 

that real wisdom is to be established in the state in which the pairs of opposites 
cannot a
"
ect us. We neither seek one nor shun the other, but see them for the 
momentary appearances they really are, only mirages cast by our own mind.
The word 
nirdwandwas
 means Òuntouched byÐindi
"
erent toÐthe pairs of 
opposites,Ó and also Òwithout the pairs of opposites.Ó At Þrst we are to be 
67
indi
"
erent to them when they insinuate themselves into our experience. But in time 
we are simply without themÐthey will have ceased to even exist for us. Then we will 
not need to endure them: they will have vanished like the dreams they are.
Tranquility
ÒEternally established in truth [reality].Ó A simple phrase, but a profound 
concept. Later in this chapter it is elucidated by Krishna saying: ÒWith attraction 
and aversion eliminated, even though moving amongst objects of sense, by self-
restraint, the self-controlled attains tranquility. In tranquility the cessation of all 
sorrows is produced for him. Truly, for the tranquil-minded the buddhi immediately 

becomes steadyÓ (2:64, 65). This truth is illustrated by an incident from the life of 
Yogiraj Shyama Charan Lahiri Mahasaya. He continually expounded the idea that 
the goal of yoga is to be established in 
sthirattwa
, in perfect tranquility.
A group of spiritual leaders in Calcutta once conspired against Lahiri Mahasaya. 
They invited him to join an evening discussion on spiritual matters. Lahiri 

Mahasays accepted the invitation and accordingly attended the meeting.
The conspirators had well prepared themselves to trap Lahiri Mahasaya. For 
example, if Lahiri Mahasaya were to express his preference for a particular deity, or 

ishta devata
, then a particular leader would Þnd exception to that choice.
In fact, each member of the group selected a particular 
devata
 (deity) such as 
Lord Vishnu, Lord Krishna, Lord Siva and the Goddess Kali, and prepared to debate 

and challenge Lahiri MahasayaÕs choice.
As soon as Lahiri Mahasaya arrived, he was received in the traditional manner 
and shown proper courtesy. After a while one of the members of the group asked 

Lahiri Mahasaya, ÒUpon which deity do you meditate?Ó Lahiri Mahasaya looked at 

him but did not reply.
Then another gentleman asked him, ÒWho is your 
ishta devata
?Ó Lahiri Mahasaya 
turned his head towards him and looked at him in the same way, while keeping his 

peace.
Finally, a third gentleman asked him, ÒCan you tell us upon which deity you 
usually meditate?Ó
Lahiri Mahasaya faced him and said very gently, ÒI meditate on 
sthirattva
 
(tranquility).Ó
The gentleman replied that he did not understand what was meant by this. 
Lahiri Mahasaya continued to observe silence.
After some time, another gentleman asked him, ÒCould you please explain this? 
I do not understand exactly what you are saying.Ó
Lahiri Mahasaya, as before, continued to maintain silence.
Another gentleman asked, ÒCan you enlighten me as to what you mean by that? 
I do not understand at all!Ó Lahiri Baba told him, ÒYou will not be able to 
understand, and also I will not be able to make you understand (realize) through 
words.Ó
The group was at a loss. All of their preparation and conniving had come to 
68
naught. Only silence prevailed. All kept silent.
After a long time Lahiri Mahasaya got up and silently prepared to leave the 
meeting. All showed him the traditional courtesy as he left.
Here we see how to fulÞll KrishnaÕs counsel: ÒBeÉ eternally established in 
reality.Ó
Material detachment
Next Krishna utters another simple phrase: ÒFree from thoughts of getting and 
keeping.Ó Frankly, this is such a high ideal there is little to say about it, except that 
it refers to intangibles as well as tangibles. To transcend the impulse to acquire or 

keep is itself liberation, for only a liberated consciousness is capable of such a 
condition (or non-condition). Practically speaking, the best policy is to immerse 
ourselves in sadhana that leads to liberation. Then we will attain the state Krishna 

has set forth to us.
Scriptures
For the wise Brahmin with true knowledge, a great deal in all the Vedas 
are of as much value as a well when there is a ßood all around (2:46).
As already said, the Vedas consist of both the karma-kanda, ritualistic 
expositions, and the jnana-kanda, expositions of the knowledge of the SelfÐjust as 
other scriptures contain teachings regarding purely external life and also inner, 
spiritual wisdom. The enlightened need neither of them, both being irrelevant, but 

for di
"
erent reasons.
The karma-kanda has been seen to be a force for bondage and therefore rejected 
by the liberated. The jnana-kanda, the Upanishads, on the other hand, has not been 

rejected by them. Rather the liberated embody and prove the truth of the 
Upanishads. For them the Upanishads are like a userÕs manual for a machine. Once 
the operation and maintenance of the machine is learned, the manual is no longer 

consulted. As long as they were learning, the Upanishads were essential, but once 
they attained true Knowing, they had no more use.
So the ÒuselessnessÓ of the karma-kanda and jnana-kanda are of a vastly 
di
"
ering character. I point this out because the two should never be equated. For 

the jnani the karma-kanda is an obstacle, but the jnana-kanda is a valued though 
outgrown teacher, a door that is unnecessary only because it has now been passed 

through.
Yet I must add that I truly believe that no one ever goes beyond the Gita; that it 
should be our constant companion as long as we exist on this earth plane.
69
How Not To Act
The next (third) chapter of the Bhagavad Gita is devoted to the subject of Karma 
YogaÐthe yoga of selßess action, including the performance of oneÕs own duty and 
the service of humanity. In my opinion, the Þnal and complete word on the subject 
is Swami VivekanandaÕs small book 
Karma Yoga
, and I recommend that you obtain 
and study it. But for now let us consider KrishnaÕs anticipation of the subject.
Your authority is for action alone, never to its fruits at any time. Never 
should the fruits of action be your motive; and never should there be 

attachment to inaction in you (2:47).
Karma/work and its fruit
Ordinarily when we speak of karma we mean the law of cause and e
"
ect, but it 
also means action or work. This is the usual meaning in the Bhagavad Gita. Karma 
includes both physical and mental activity, including both thought and feeling, 

which is why Jesus said that the mere desire to do evil was a form of committing 
the act (Matthew 5:21-22, 28). As Krishna says: ÒThe path of action is di
!
cult to 
understand.É He who perceives inaction in action and action in inactionÐsuch a 

man is wise among menÓ (4:17-18). The fruit of action, 
karmaphala
, is the result or 
e
"
ect of activity, both actual and intended.
Authorization to work
In some translations the expression Òright to actÓ is used, but that is a very poor 
translation of 
adhikara
, although just about everyone uses it. Adhikara means 
authority, qualiÞcation, jurisdiction, or prerogative; only peripherally does it mean 
privilegeÐand never a Òright.Ó
Basically, by taking human birth we have been authorized or enabled to engage 
in action. In truth, we cannot escape such an engagement. Therefore we must learn 

from Krishna how to do it correctly. And even before that we have to learn how to 
view our action and its authorization. Krishna is teaching us the correct perspective 

we must have on our entire life, which consists of nothing but action and reaction 
to that action.
The way in and the way out
Presently we are caught in the net of constant activity, and consequently 
enmeshed in bondage. Action has put us in this mess and action can free us from it. 
As Swami Sivananda translates an upcoming verse (2:50): ÒEndowed with wisdom 
(evenness of mind), one casts o
"
 in this life both good and evil deeds; therefore, 
devote yourself to Yoga; Yoga is skill in action.Ó We must walk the tightrope of right 

action, as Buddha has counseled us. Krishna has given us several principles we 
must understand and assimilate.
70
Your authority is for action aloneÉ
The sole purpose of the universeÐand our involvement in itÐis evolution. And all 
growth is movement, either automatic or intentional. For us who have come to the 
level of conscious self-awareness, action is the answer. Until now we have been 

carried along by the wave of mechanical, involuntary movementÐwhich was 
necessary, since we did not have the requisite level of development to take charge of 
our own movement forward. But now we do. During the period in which we were 

being impelled along by the currents of cosmic life (that are indicated by the 
movement of the planets), alternately emerging from and being submerged in the 
ocean of samsara, we set many forces in motion by our response to those ups and 

downs. These forces took the form of both karma and samskara (mental 
impressions from past action). So now that we are on our own to a signiÞcant 
degree, we have to deal with them, mostly by neutralizing them or using them as 

ascending steps in our inner growth. Because of all this we are authorized to engage 
in actions.
It is our desire for objects and our engaging in work meant to result in the 
fulÞllment of those desires that has entangled us and put us in our present state of 

confusion and bondage. To engage in further action with desire as the moving force 
would only compound our dilemma. So we act for the sake of action aloneÐnot 

random action, but action which will free us from the compulsion to act. In other 
words, we begin to act as free, conscious beings, not as semi-conscious wanderers 
or compulsives. By acting we bring about freedom from action.
Énever to its fruits at any time
Right action is not supposed in and of itself to Òbear fruit,Ó but to free us from 
all Òharvesting.Ó Usually, when we act we put ourselves under the necessity of 
reaping the e
"
ects of the action, Òfor whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reapÓ (Galatians 6:7). But there is a way to act in which there is no result except the 

freedom from further action. Some actions forge chains and other actions break 
them. The latter is needful for our progress.
Never should the fruits of actions be your motive
Results in the form of external e
"
ects are not at all what ultimately matters. 
What does matter is the e
"
ect of action on our state of consciousness. To free our 
consciousness we must be totally free of desire for results. When we can act in this 
way all bonds drop away and we are freeÐnot Self-realized as some erroneously 
think, but free to move on to higher degrees of evolution without any more 

entanglements. Then Self-realization is possible.
And never should there be attachment to inaction in you
It has to be admitted that a great deal of Òdetachment,Ó Òindi
"
erence,Ó 
Òuninvolvement,Ó and ÒrenunciationÓ is nothing more than classical laziness on the 
71
mental and physical levels. In India especially we Þnd a lot of ÒrenouncersÓ and 
Ònon-attachersÓÐboth monastic and non-monasticÐthat are simply bundles of 
tamasic ignorance and indolence.
Years ago I heard a minister tell of a man in his home town who was Òcalled by 
God,Ó and consequently refused to engage in any ÒworldlyÓ activity. All day long (in 

good weather) he sat on the front porch so he would be seen and read the BibleÐor 
at least turned the pages in a leisurely manner. The pages were gilt-edged, so they 

ßashed and gleamed in the sunlight. Occasionally his wife would ask him to do a 
simple task or give her a little help. He would smile, lift his voice so the neighbors 
could hear, and reply: ÒWhy, wife, do you not know Ôthat I must be about my 

FatherÕs businessÕ?Ó And that was that. Much later I saw a television program in 
which some people announced: ÒWe just want to do our own thing.Ó When asked: 
ÒWhat 
is
 your Ôown thingÓ?Ó They answered: Ò
Nothing
.Ó Krishna warns us against 
this vacuousness of mind and heart.
By the way, Krishna urges us to 
desireless
 action, but not to 
motiveless
 action. 
There is a di
"
erence. We are to act with a motive: liberation.
72
How To Act
Krishna has told us how not to act, and now will tell us how to act.
Steadfast in yoga, perform actions abandoning attachment, being 
indi
"
erent to success or failure. It is said that such evenness of mind is yoga 
(2:48).
Steadfast in yoga, perform actions
The Þrst factor of right action is the all-encompassing factor of Þxing the mind 
and heart in yogaÐthat is, being constantly engaged in the interior process of yoga 
whatever the external situation or action. Ultimately it means to do all things with 
our consciousness united with divine consciousness: God. That is easy to say, but 

what does it really mean? Krishna is being eminently practical: the only way to act 
united to divine consciousness is to hold on to that Consciousness through 
continual immersion in yoga sadhana. ÒEstablished in yoga concentration,É he who 

thinks of me constantly, whose mind never goes elsewhere, for him, the constantly-
joined [yoked] yogi, I am easy to attainÓ (8:12-14). There we have it as easy to see 
as the oft-cited amalaka fruit in the hand.
Having abandoned attachment
One of the major obstacles in our life is attachment to the fruits of our actions. 
This, too, will disappear as through interior cultivation our consciousness will turn 
inward, the inner divine eye will open, and seeing all things in their true nature, the 
fruits of our actions will no longer seem relevant to us.
Once we have tasted good food, bad food loses all attraction for us. Once we 
have tasted the Supreme, have touched Òthe hem of his garment,Ó external 

attainments will mean very littleÐand in time will seem nothing. But this holy 

indi
"
erence can only come from touching the Divine. Mental gymnastics in the 
form of analyzing objects of desire and recounting their defects is ultimately 
without worth and is even harmful, for thinking so much about them (even though 

disparagingly) will attach us to them and draw them to us. ÒFor a man dwelling on 
the objects of the senses, attachment to them is born,Ó Krishna will tell us in the 
sixty-second verse of this chapter.
We detach ourselves from objects by attaching ourselves to God. It is the only 
wayÐnot just the best or the easiest.
Become indi
"
erent to success or failure
Even-mindedness in success and failure is impossible to achieve by mind-
gaming and is in the Þnal analysis worthless. Here, too, it is the Þxing of the 
consciousness on/in God that does the needful. ÒKeep your mind on me alone, 
causing your intellect to enter into me. Thenceforward, without doubt, you shall 
73
dwell in meÓ (12:8). When a person dwells in God, what outside success or failure 
can mean anything to him? What desire or attachment can arise in someone who is 
united in consciousness to the Source of all?
So often in spiritual life we think of what we should not do, rather than be 
intent on what we should do. For example, in the consciousness of spirit greed 

cannot arise. So there is no need to go around telling ourselves: ÒI must not let 
greed enter my mind.Ó Instead we should be intent on remembering God, Þxing our 

mind on Divinity. Then greed will become impossible to us.
It is said that evenness of mind is yoga
Evenness of mind is possible only when the awareness is centered in that which 
is perfectly stable and still. And that is only a single thing: Spirit. Everything else is 
changing and therefore unstable and subject to anxiety and compulsion. ÒChange 

and decay all around I see. O Thou Who changest not, abide with me,Ó says the 
song. But God always abides with and within us. The problem is that 
we do not abide
 
in the consciousness of God. And 
this
 is what is yoga: the uniting (joiningÐyoga) of 
our mind with God.
ÒLose thyself in him, even as the arrow is lost in the targetÓ (Mundaka 
Upanishad 2.2.4).
74
Right Perspective
Action is inferior by far to buddhi yoga. Seek refuge in enlightenment; 
pitiable are those who are motivated by actionÕs fruit (2:49).
It is a fact that many aspiring yogis of East and West believe that mere good or 
right action is karma yoga. This is not so, as our study of the Gita will reveal later 
on. Karma yoga is acting with the mind Þxed on GodÐnot on the action. This is the 
real purpose of all action: the perfection of awareness. That is, by outer action we 
a
"
ect our internal state of consciousness. When we understand this and live out 

our life with this perspective, contentment is assured. Activity with desire is 
egocentric, whereas desireless action is spirit-oriented and results in freedom. An 
advanced disciple of Swami Sivananda once told a gathering of American yogis that 

Swami Sivananda was the only true karma yogi she had met in her life.
Action is inferior by far to buddhi yoga
Karma yoga is done by yoking our consciousness with the buddhi, the principle 
of enlightenment, our highest ÒmindÓ in the form of enlightened intuition. When 
the awareness is centered inÐnot just pointed towardÐthe divine consciousness that 

is common to both the individual Self (jivatman) and the Supreme Self 
(Paramatman), then we have peace, both because the Self is transcendental and 
beyond all possibility of agitation and because in the enlightened state we 

understand all that is going on as well as the roots of what is taking place. Having 
perfect peace and perfect understanding, we abide in perfect tranquility. In just a 
few verses from now Krishna will begin describing exactly what that state is and 

how it manifests in the illumined individual.
Buddhi Yoga is the Yoga of Intelligence which later came to be called Jnana Yoga, 
the Yoga of Knowledge.
Seek refuge in buddhi!
Krishna does not bother with short-sighted strategies, but tells us to literally 
shoot for the top, saying: ÒSeek refuge in enlightenment [buddhau]!Ó Buddhau 
means the state of consciousness that is attained throughÐand isÐthe buddhi. The 
buddhi is the source of both thought and intuition. If we center our awareness in 

that we will become ready for the ultimate intuition that is Brahmajnana, the 
knowledge of Brahman.
What other refuge can there be? Any conditioned state of mind must by its very 
nature be temporary. However beneÞcial any external condition, place, or object 

may be, still it, too, cannot last forever. But Brahman does. Most importantly, the 
Upanishads tell us the paramount truth: ÒHe who knows Brahman becomes 

Brahman. He passes beyond all sorrow. He overcomes evil. Freed from the fetters of 
ignorance he becomes immortalÓ (Mundaka Upanishad 3.2.9). ÒHe who knows 
75
Brahman attains the supreme goal. Brahman is the abiding reality, he is pure 
knowledge, and he is inÞnity. He who knows that Brahman dwells within the lotus 
of the heart becomes one with him and enjoys all blessingsÓ (Taittiriya Upanishad 
2:1:3).
It is true: ÒPitiable are those who are motivated by actionÕs fruit.Ó
How to be free
He who abides in the buddhi casts o
"
 here in this world both good and 
evil deeds. Therefore, yoke yourself to yoga.
 [This is a play on words since 
ÒyokeÓ and ÒyogaÓ have the same root: 
yuj
.] 
Yoga is skill in action (2:50).
 The 
buddhi yogi Òcasts o
"
, here in the world, both good and evil actions.Ó It is not a 
matter of Òpie in the skyÓ after death. The buddhi yogi attains right here in this 

world.
The concept of casting o
"
 both good and evil actions is often misunderstood, so 
we should give it a careful scrutiny. Right away we must comprehend that Krishna 

does not mean that enlightened people are beyond the rules and can do any stupid 

or evil thing that crosses their minds, that somehow it is all right for them but not 
for us. This idiocy has produced the contemporary situation in both the West and 
the East in which we do not expect from the abounding gurus, masters and avatars 

the basic decency and good sense that we demand from ourselves and everyone 
else. Simple civility is not even expected of these miscreants, much less the conduct 
that Krishna will be telling us is the infallible mark of the illumined individual. 

There is no need for me to outline their iniquitous and preposterous minds and 
conduct. Krishna will unmask them by informing us as how the really enlightened 
act. Then if we do not get the idea it is because we do not want to.
But now let us return to the concept of freedom from virtue and vice. Liberation 
(moksha) includes freedom from all conditioning. Unhappily, most religion is 

nothing but conditioning, based on fear and greed: do what is wrong and you will 

be punished, and do what is right and you will be rewarded. Since fear and greed 
are instincts formed and rooted in our past incarnations in the subhuman levels, 
they are unworthy of human beings, much less those that aspire to divinity. Right 

conduct must be a free choice. A compulsion to do good and a compulsion to avoid 
evil is instinctual, not intelligent, and therefore not a matter of buddhi yoga. No 
matter how well-intentioned the formation of such compulsion might be, the 

aspiring yogi must eliminate all such instinctual reactions. Buddhi yoga arises from 
deep within the individual. Any external inßuence or coercion militates again this.
A few verses previously we were told: ÒBe indi
"
erent to the pairs of opposites.Ó 
Why? Because they are inherent in one another, they are inseparable. Anyone with 

experience or observation knows that love and hate easily morph back and forth, for 
they possess the same rootÐthe ego. The same, then, is true of virtue and vice, good 

and evil, when based on the ego-personality of the conditioned individual. We often 
accuse people of being hypocrites, when actually they are under the sway of the 
dualities. We cannot cling to one and hope to be free of the other, for they are one 
76
and the sameÐonly the polarity is di
"
erent. True goodness, true virtue, has no 
opposite. Krishna is not speaking of this higher level, but rather of that on which 
Arjuna, in the grip of egoic emotion, is functioning.
Unity on all levels is the goal of the yogi, and that transcends the classiÞcations 
of good or evil. The ÒgoodÓ of the enlightened, on the other hand, is not just 

relative goodÐit is the embodiment of divine good.
Back to the heart of things
Krishna, like any worthy teacher, again points us to the very core of the matter, 
saying: ÒTherefore, yoke yourself to yoga.Ó There is really no other way to achieve 
anything true or real in spiritual life. ÒSeek ye Þrst the kingdom of God, and his 
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto youÓ (Matthew 6:33), said 
Jesus. We need not concern ourselves with a multitude of spiritual goals, but Þx our 

intention on the single purpose of all relative existence: union with Brahman. This 
is why Jesus also said: ÒMartha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many 
things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall 

not be taken away from herÓ (Luke 10:41, 42).
Skill in action
Krishna is not speaking of e
!
cient work when he says: ÒYoga is skill in action.Ó 
The skill in action which Krishna declares to be yoga is action performed with 
ourselves yoked to yoga, united with Unity. It is work in which remembrance of 

God and centering in the Self goes on uninterruptedly. If we are distracted by our 
work and forget to maintain our sadhana throughout, then it is not skill in action. 
Only an adept yogi can engage in real karma yoga, for only those skilled in 

meditation are capable of karma yoga.
The way of the sages
Those who are truly established in the buddhi, the wise ones, having 
abandoned the fruits of action, freed from the bondage of rebirth, go to the 
place that is free from pain (2:51).
That place or abode is our very Self, for That alone is free from pain or the 
possibility of pain. 
Now Krishna sums it all up for us:

When your buddhi crosses beyond the mire of delusion, then you shall be 
disgusted with the to-be-heard and what has been heard. When your buddhi 

stands, Þxed in deep meditation, unmoving, disregarding the Vedic ritual-

centered perspective, then you will attain yoga (union) (2:52-53).
77
Wisdom About the Wise
Arjuna said: What is the description of him who is steady of insight, of 
him who is steadfast in deep meditation, of him who is steady in thought? 
How does he speak? How does he sit? How does he move about? (2:54).
Earlier, I spoke of how some supposed spiritual Þgures in both East and West 
are given a free hand to devastate the minds and lives of others just because they 

bear the title of ÒguruÓ or Òavatar.Ó This is because of a complete miscomprehension 
of the nature of enlightenment and how it manifests in the consciousness and 

behavior of the enlightened. In response to ArjunaÕs question, Krishna tells us 
everything we need to knowÐand which we should ever keep in mind when 
encountering supposedly enlightened people. Krishna will take eighteen verses to 

give Arjuna and us the total picture. Here are the Þrst eight of them.
Without ÒwantsÓ
The Holy Lord said: When he leaves behind all the desires of the mind, 
contented in the Self by the Self, then he is said to be steady in wisdom 
(2:55).
Nothing could be easier to understand: 
an enlightened person wants nothing
, Þnding 
total fulÞllment in the SelfÐboth individual and universal.
Therefore when we see people with spiritual goals such as serving God in others 
or exhibiting a veritable passion about a world mission or saving or enlightening 
others, we can know they are not illumined, and therefore incapable of doing any of 
those things in a real manner, however Þne the exterior machinery might appear.
A true spiritual teacher has no expectation of others whatsoever, never foists 
demands on them. Knowing that all growth comes from within, never from an 

outer factorÐincluding himÐthe worthy teacher knows that it is his duty to teach, 

and that is the absolute end of the matter. From then on it is up to the student to 
either follow the teaching or not. If he asks for help or advice from the teacher, it is 
the teacherÕs duty to give the requested assistance 
and then leave the matter alone
. In 
spiritual life as well as material life there is a division of labor that should be 
adhered to. Under the guise of love or devotion there should be no violation of 
spiritual law. And no authentic teacher will ever break any law.
In contrast
It is virtually impossible to Þnd any popular ÒspiritualÓ teacher that does not live 
like the jewel in the lotusÐboth materially and socially. Although there is a pretense 
that their disciples are insistent upon it, it is really the guru that demands continual 
adulation and material accouterments that would have been considered extreme 

even for a Di Medici monarch. One guru in India has himself and his wife weighed 
every year and given their combined weights in gold. And the palatial living 
78
quarters of the gurus are like overdone satires of the houses of the most vulgar 
nouveau riche.
At the bottom of this outrageous aggrandizement on the psychological and 
material levels is a profound sense of insecurity, discontentment and often self-

loathing on the part of the super-guru. I have had experience of this Þrsthand when 
visiting their ashrams and conversing with them. The pathology is very evident. Let 
me give a single example.
Once I was the guest of a super-guru after having spent several days at a yoga 
retreat sponsored by his organization. I had spoken to the retreatants several times 

during those days, and was being rewarded by being invited into the August 

Presence. (I had previously been asked to sign a legal document stating that I would 
never ask the institution for money in the future as payment for my speaking. I had 
refused to signÐand never asked them for money.)
As we sat at the table, being served by anxious, hushed, and devoted Ògopis,Ó 
Super-G began to tell me about the well-known rock groups that had asked him to 

come speak during their concerts both inside and outside the United States. Since I 

disliked all popular music (especially rock music), and being aware of the negative 
character of the groups he was naming, I was listening with a mixture of 
amazement and disgust. And then I got the idea: 
he was trying to make me jealous!
 Did 
he really think that, having lived with great masters in India and having received the 
grace of so many other great saints, I would be impressed by a listing of these 
aberrant drug-addicted pandemonium peddlers?
More was to come. Since I did not swoon at the listing of the rock groups, he 
passed on to speaking tours. He had been invited to speak in the Soviet Union! And 

also in a host of other gruesome places where there could not possibly be genuine 

spiritual interest. This list was peppered with the names of celebrities who would 
either be sponsoring or accompanying him.
That left me una
"
ected, so he moved on to the subject of living 
accommodations. First I got a recounting of what centers of his organization were 

engaged in providing luxurious apartments and houses for him, even stocking a 
complete set of his tailor-made silk clothes so he would never need to travel around 

the country with luggage. I dislike travel and being away from our ashram, so that 
moved me not.
Finally he resorted to real estate. First of all, a road for his exclusive use was 
being cleared in a local forest where some disciples had managed to purchase a 

large tract of land so he could be totally isolated.
(No matter how ÒlovingÓ and ÒgivingÓ the super gurus are, they like to have 
inaccessible retreats away from their disciples, some of themÐusually the 

AmericansÐeven doing some kind of Òearly retirementÓ so they will not have to have 
contact with their adoring devotees. Some of them claim to need solitude so they 

can Òwrite,Ó though little or nothing is ever published. However one super-guru 
emerged every week from his state of retreat to travel some hours to a major 
vacation-playground to take saxophone lessons from a well-known jazz musician.)
79
After the road was put in, a renowned architect was going to come and study the 
land and design a house speciÞcally to Þt in with the landscape and (of course) the 
ecology of the forest. Then the house would be built by the devoteesÐor at least by 
their money.
He had come to the end of the line. I was not impressed. I was appalled. He was 
mi
"
ed. I was glad to get out of there never to return. Fortunately I had many 

memories of simple, even barren, rooms in which I had sat with great saints in 

India, rooms where they stayed in joyful contentment, living the simplest of lives. 
Before going to India I had seen the two tiny rooms in which Paramhansa 
Yogananda, head of a world-wide spiritual organization, had lived for over a quarter 

of a century, as well as the simple little kitchen across the hall where he had so 
often cooked for his beloved students.
ÒContented in the Self by the Self, then he is said to be steady in wisdom.Ó I had 
seen KrishnaÕs words veriÞed in the lives of the true yogis.
Free!
He whose mind is not agitated in misfortunes, freed from desire for 
pleasures, from whom passion, fear and anger have departed, steady in 
thoughtÐsuch a man is said to be a sage (2:56).
ÒThe kingdom of God is peace and joy in the Holy GhostÓ (Romans 14:17). 
Living in the inner kingdom of inÞnite peace and joy, the enlightened are not 

a
"
ected by fortune or misfortune, for nothing can change their spiritual status. 

ÒThe same in pain or in pleasureÉ [he] is Þt for absorption in BrahmanÓ (14:24, 
26). Even for us, ÒHe whose happiness is within, whose delight is within, whose 
illumination is within: that yogi, identical in being with Brahman, attains 

BrahmanirvanaÓ (5:24).
Desire, fear and anger are manifestations of what we may justiÞably call Òraw 
ego.Ó Other emotions are further removed from the source and their character not 

so easy to detect. This unholy trinity is thoroughly intertwined. They are ego-based 
responses to stimuli of di
"
ering character. Desire arises when we think something 
external can change our inner or outer status for the better (or at least more 

enjoyable), fear arises when we feel endangered, and anger arises when we are 
mistreated or our desire thwarted. All other responses are permutations of these 
three, their o
"
spring. The enlightened is free of them.
Please be wary of those who pretend that when they manifest these passions 
they are Òjust lilas,Ó Òmere appearances,Ó Òwritings on water,Ó etc. How can they 

beneÞt you by deceiving you or causing you pain and confusion by their seeming 

negative behavior? Lesser teachers may do so, erroneously thinking it is the only 
way to help youÐas a kind of psychological shock treatment. But a truly illumined 
person will do no such thing. Their very presence can work in you the necessary 

changes. I have both experienced it and witnessed it.
Broken bonds
80
He who is without desire in all situations, encountering this or that, 
pleasant or unpleasant, not rejoicing or dislikingÐhis wisdom stands Þrm 
(2:57).
There are some key words here we need to look at.
Sarvatra
 means Òon all sides,Ó Òeverywhere,Ó and Òin all things.Ó
Anabhisnehas
 means Òwithout a
"
ectionÓ Òunimpassioned,Ó and Ònondesirous.Ó So 
Krishna is saying that at all times, in all places, and on every level of existence, the 
wise one has no attraction toward something, no emotional reaction toward 
anything, and absolutely no desire for anything. Further, he is neither elated nor 
disturbed when 
prapya
Ðencountering, obtaining, attaining or incurringÐthat which is 
shubhashubham
Ðpleasant or unpleasant or a mixture of both.
Shubhashubham
 can also mean lucky or unlucky, fortunate or unfortunate. In 
other words, nothing moves him, for 
tasya prajna pratishthita
Ðhis consciousness, his 
awareness, and the wisdom that arises therefrom is established, standing Þrm at all 
times. For nothing can be added to him or taken away. For him pleasure and pain, 
gain and loss, victory and defeat, are all one and the same (see 2:38). ÒContent with 

what comes unbidden, beyond the dualities [pairs of opposites] and free from envy, 
the same in success or failure, even though acting, he is not boundÓ (4:22). ÒHe has 
no purpose at all in action or in non-action; and he has no need of any being for any 

purpose whatsoeverÓ (3:18). He is free indeed.
Living within
And when he withdraws completely the senses from the objects of the 
senses, as the tortoise draws in its limbs, his wisdom is established Þrmly 
(2:58).
This is not referring to just control of the senses in a mechanical way, but to the 
fact that the enlightened person lives thoroughly within himself. Although we 

usually think of the senses as the material organs of perception, in reality the senses 

are astral and causal, and their main purpose is to see in the spirit. So the liberated 
person truly lives according to nature on all levels. Seeing with the inner eye, 
hearing with the inner ear, etc., he sees and hears true. Also, it means that when he 

withdraws the senses he does not become inert and unconscious in what the yogis 
jokingly call jada samadhiÐa state of mental inertia which is neither meditation or 
samadhi. Rather, he is more conscious than otherwise. And it also means that when 

an accomplished yogi withdraws his senses he does not fall asleep as a 
consequenceÐsomething I expect we have all done to our embarrassment.
Desires
Sense-objects turn away from the abstinent, yet the taste for them 
remains. But the taste also turns away from him who has seen the Supreme 
(2:59).
Prabhavananda: ÒThe abstinent run away from what they desire but carry their 
desires with them: when a man enters Reality, he leaves his desires behind him.Ó
81
How much is said in this simple sentence! The truly enlightened are not simply 
free from desire, they have become 
incapable
 of desire. This is extremely important 
to know. We must apply this to ourselves, and not foolishly think that just because 
we avoid the objects of desire and thereby experience no desire, that we are truly 

desireless. For just being without desire is not the same as having passed into the 
realm of consciousness where desire cannot exist.
The senses
The troubling senses forcibly carry away the mind of even the striving man 
of wisdom. Restraining all these senses, he should sit in yoga, intent on me. 
Surely, he whose senses are controlledÐhis consciousness stands steadfast and 
Þrm (2:60-61).
People get fooled in relation to the senses, too. I think somewhere I have told 
about a little girl I knew whose parents tried for years to keep her from sucking her 

thumb. Even in the primary grades she sat around with her thumb in her mouth. 
One day, when she was visiting our house, she was watching television with thumb 

in mouth. At one point she pulled out her thumb, called to my stepmother who was 
in the kitchen: ÒGuess what! I donÕt suck my thumb anymore!Ó and put it right back 
in. Business as usual.
It is amazing to see the di
"
erence between the ascetic approaches of Western 
and Eastern religions. Western spiritual writers blame everything on demons, 

claiming that every evil thought and impulse comes from evil spirits. The yogis 

(Hindu, Taoist, and Buddhist), on the other hand, understand that these negative 
thoughts and impulses come from within usÐthat we are totally responsible for the 
folly that foams up in our minds. Western ascetics wear themselves out battling and 

driving away demons. What can they achieve by living out this fantasy? Certainly 
negative spirits exist, but what can they do to us in the Þnal analysis? It is the 
enemy withinÐour own ego and its ignoranceÐthat really harms us and none other.
A religion that does not teach its adherents to recognize and deal with their own 
culpability is right to be obsessed with sin, for what else can it produce? No wonder 

that Jews, Christians, and Moslems welter in Þxation on sin and evil in contrast 

with the Hindus, Taoists and Buddhists who focus on innate holiness and 
perfection.
There was a great saint in the WestÐa Pope, actuallyÐwho tried to bring some 
light into the of darkness of Christian sin-consciousness and sin-obsession, but 

instead was condemned for heresy. Poor Pope Pelagius is immortalized only in 
Christian fulminations against the ÒPelagian heresyÓ that man is essentially good 

and capable of holiness. Unintentionally, RogetÕs 21st Century Thesaurus gives an 
insight on this. Under the heading of Òobsession,Ó the Þrst entry is Òattraction.Ó 
There you have it. Obsession with sin is attraction to sin; preoccupation with 

holiness is attraction to holiness. You get what you Þx your mind on.
ÒTherefore at all times remember me, and Þght with your mind [manas] and 
intellect [buddhi] Þxed on me. Thus without doubt you shall come to me. With 
82
mind made steadfast by yoga, which turns not to anything else, to the Divine 
Supreme Spirit he goes, meditating on himÓ (8:7-8).
ÒKeep your mind on me alone, causing your intellect to enter into me. 
Thenceforward, without doubt, you shall dwell in meÓ (12:8).
83
Wisdom About Both the Foolish
and the Wise
The next ten verses of the Gita are mixed in character. They tell us about both 
the foolish and the wise.
Forty-Þve years ago I read the Gita in Swami PrabhavanandaÕs translation, which 
I still recommend as the best for getting an overview of the GitaÕs message. The 
Gita was so wonderful, so enlivening, that I read it while walking to school 
(university) and while walking back home. Home! It was not the building where I 
was residing that was home. Sanatana Dharma, the truth embodied in the Gita, was 

my true home. And I had at last found it.
Everything about the Gita astonished and delighted me, but one moment stands 
out vividly. I read the verses quoted in the next section, and paused in genuine awe. 

This book told me the exact stages of the mind as it becomes enmeshed in delusion 
and as it frees itself from delusion. What a Þnd! What a contrast to the puerile 
religion I had heretofore struggled and agonized to make sense ofÐbecause it had no 

sense. Such simple and yet profound wisdom to be found in the Gita was surely the 
path to freedom. I have never changed my mind.
Human beings are rational creatures, at least potentially. It is our mind, our 
intellect, that is our distinctive mark. Animals certainly show both intelligence and 

even intuition, but the gap between them and us is virtually inÞnite. How terrible, 
then, to be trapped in behaviorist, dogmatic religions that have no psychology 

whatsoever, that comprehend nothing of the human status and composition, yet 
fume at us that we are sinners and worthy of divine punishment. Such religions are 
nothing more than versions of Animal Trainer (God) and Animals (us). The Trainer 

is motivated by an irrational and insane drive to be adored and obeyed while 
employing means that can only make him hated and feared. The animals are living 
on instinct alone (called ÒfaithÓ), dominated by fear and greed. When the animals 

do their tricks right they get rewarded; when they do not, they get the whip. And 
when they get ÒretiredÓ from earthly life, if they have performed well they will get 
yummies forever, and if they have not performed well they will be shunted into a 

dungeon and live in torture and misery forever. The more personal religions which 
endeavor to bring in emotion in the guise of love and devotion are equally ugly and 
irrational. With them it is all a matter of Abusive Parent and Abused Children.
To Þnd the truth of the Eternal Self, the inner Tao, the Buddha Nature, is the 
only alternative to mind-numbness, atheism, or madness. The Bhagavad Gita is the 

revealer of truth, of reality. It awakens, inspires, and enables us in the unfoldment 

of our true nature.
How not to do it
84
For a man dwelling on the objects of the senses, attachment to them is 
born. From attachment desire is born. And from [thwarted] desire anger is 
born. From anger arises delusion; from delusion, loss of memory; from loss of 
memory, destruction of intelligence. From destruction of intelligence one is 

lost (2:62-63).
It is true that the journey of a thousand miles begins with the Þrst step. In these 
two verses Krishna has described the entire journey, beginning with thinking of 

sensory objects and experience and ending in total loss, in destruction. Each step 
should be considered well.
Thinking (dwelling on)
Thought is powerÐmagnetic power, particularly. That is, thought can draw or 
repel whatever is thought about, depending upon the polarity of the individual 
mind. Many times we see that people bring to themselves the things they 
continually think about, but we also see that thinking about something can repel it 
from a person. For example, the Franciscan Order is almost obsessed with the idea 

of poverty, yet it is one of the wealthiest institutions in the world. Thinking about 
poverty brought them wealth! This is not said in jest. I have seen people draw to 
themselves the things they detested, and seen others drive out of their lives the 

things they yearned for. It is a matter of the polarity of the thought force, of 
magnetic energy.
As a rule, though, thought brings to us what we think about. Even if we begin 
by disliking or opposing the object of thought, in time we become attached to it, 

either by coming to like it (whether or not we admit the liking) or becoming unable 
to dispel it from our minds. We see this in the lives of many crusaders. They 

become what they oppose. In fact, they often oppose something to cover up their 
secret attraction to it.
It has long been known that the opposite of love is not hate, but indi
"
erence. 
Krishna is aware of this, and is counseling us to simply ignore that which we do not 

wish to become involved with. That is why in meditation we ignore any distractions 
and just keep relaxed in the awareness of the process of meditationÐand nothing 

else. If we do this, in time the distractions will dissolve, and in the meantime, being 
ignored, they will not be distractions, practically speaking. So if we will not obsess 
on a subject, it will not touch or capture us. This is a major principle of spiritual 

life.
The stages of destruction
Dwelling on the objects of the senses, attachment to them is born.
 Attachment means 
having an a
!
nity for something, or having some feeling of desire to be aware of it 
or have it present. It has a deÞnite emotional connotation. It also means to feel 

some kind of kinship with an object, or to feel a need for itÐeven a dependency. 
Attachment also means to be linked to something, to become externally associated 
with it. This has already been discussed as a consequence of thinking continually of 
85
an object.
Obviously there is a positive side to this. If we think of that which is beneÞcial 
and elevating we will better ourselves. Sri Ramakrishna once met a young man who 
was psychically very sensitive, and who was being employed as a medium by some 

spiritualists in Calcutta. He spoke to him a truth that we should never forget or 
neglect to embody in our lives: ÒMy son, if you think about ghosts you will become 
a ghost. If you think about God, you will become God. Which do you prefer?Ó
From attachment, desire is born.
 
The word used here is 
kamas
 which means any 
degree of desire for somethingÐfrom mild wish to intense craving. The implication 

is that the nature of objects is one of escalating absorption. We cannot stop at 

simple attachment. If we permit attachment, it will in time grow into something 
much worse: controlling addiction. This is the path to loss of freedom, to 
enslavement.
From [thrwarted] desire anger is born.
 If we do not get what we want, or if we get it 
and then lose it, or if we get it and Þnd it is not what we wantedÐor less than what 

we desiredÐanger (krodha) arises in varying degrees and forms.
From anger arises delusion [moha].
 We not only lose our freedom through addiction 
to objects, we also lose our rational faculty. For when our addictions are thwarted 

we respond with the ultimate irrationality: anger, which accomplishes nothing but 

misery and completely annihilates our good sense and reason. 
Sammohas
 also means 
confusion, not in the sense of simple disorientation, but in the sense of breakdown 

of mental coherence arising from delusion. It is a form of moral insanity.
From delusion, loss of the memory.
 
Smritivibhramah
 literally means to wander away 
from what is known (remembered)Ðfrom what has been learned through 

experience. For it is what we know, and remember, from our own experience, inner 

and outer, that is fundamental to our evolution. That alone is living wisdom, 
everything else is merely theory, however true it may be objectively. The whole 
purpose of the chain of births we have undergone is our gaining of practical 

knowledge, knowledge that is fully ours because it has arisen from our own 
experience and our insight into that experience. Just as no one can eat for us, so no 
one, however evolved they may be, can gain knowledge for us, or even impart it to 

us. Until we know something for ourselves it is nothing more than speculation or 
theory.
From loss of the memory, destruction of intelligence [buddhi].
 Our very faculty of 
intelligence, the seat of evolution, is destroyed by this amnesia. This is terrible, for 

expanding intelligence is the fundamental characteristic of evolution. That is why 
Krishna speaks so often of buddhi yoga as the path to perfection.
From destruction of intelligence one is lost [destroyed].
 When buddhi is destroyed, 
we 
ourselves
 are destroyed. (
Pranashyati
 means both destroyed or lost.) This is no 

exaggeration, as the foregoing sections demonstrate. The purpose of our entry into 

relativity was the development of higher intelligence so we might be Þtted to 
participate in the inÞnite consciousness of God. If we impair and erode that 
intelligence we frustrate the very purpose of our (relative) existence.
86
On the other hand, if we comprehend KrishnaÕs words in this matter, we can see 
that the conscious deepening of our buddhi is the path to liberation. But most of all 
we can learn how to never take even the Þrst step on the path to personal 
destruction. By refusing to allow our minds to mull over that which is delusive, we 

protect ourselves from future entanglement in the nets of delusion. If we are 
already somewhere along the path to destruction we can also use this list to see 
how to reverse the process. For the message of the Gita is always and at all times 

the message of hope and betterment.
87
The Way of Peace
Walking safely
However, with attraction and aversion eliminated, even though moving 
amongst objects of sense, by self-restraint, the self-controlled attains 
tranquility (2:64).
The words translated ÒattractionÓ and ÒaversionÓ are 
raga
 and 
dwesha
. Raga is 
both emotional (instinctual) and intellectual desire. It may range from simple liking 

or preference to intense desire and attraction. Dwesha is the opposite. It is 

aversion/avoidance in relation to an object, implying dislike. This, too, can be 
emotional (instinctual) or intellectual, ranging from simple non-preference to 
intense repulsion, antipathy and even hatred.
We must keep in mind that anything can grow and change. Therefore simple 
liking can develop into intense craving, and mild dislike can turn into intense 

aversion or hatred. And since opposites are intrinsically linked to one another and 

can even turn into one another, the philosophical and yogic texts frequently speak 
of raga-dwesha, the continual cycling back and forth between desire/aversion and 
like/dislike. Obviously, this makes for a confused and fragmented life and mind, 

something from which any sensible person would wish to extricate himself.
There are a multitude of supposed cures for what ails us. The vast majority do 
not work because they are not really aimed at what truly ails us. The rest usually do 

not work because they are based on a miscomprehension of the nature of the 
problem, or because they are simply nonsensical and time-wasters. This is true of 
most religion and of a great deal that is called yoga.
If we look at this verse we discover that Krishna is speaking of a very real inner 
state in which the individual is utterly freeÐand incapableÐof raga and dwesha, and 

not just a psychological alteration coming from insight into or analysis of the 

defects of addicting objects. In fact, just the opposite will happen, for Òthinking 
about sense-objects will attach you to sense-objects,Ó as we considered previously. 
This is a law, and we will be wise to keep it in mind. There is no use in trying to 

talk ourselves out of delusion. We must dispel delusionÐnot by concentrating on 
delusion or resisting it, but by attaining jnana: spiritual knowledge coming from our 
own direct experience. This will dissolve delusion automatically.
Therefore, when we are no longer subject to attraction and aversion for objects, 
we can move among them without being inßuenced or moved in any way. But we 

must be very sure that we truly are no longer susceptible to them, and not just 

going through a temporary period in which we Þnd ourselves indi
"
erent to them. 
Such periods are sure to end in re-emergence of passions that in the meantime have 
grown even stronger within us. Many ascetics have been deluded in this way, so we 

must be careful.
I have left the most important for last. The Sanskrit has 
atmavyashyair vidheyatma
: 
88
Òhaving controlled himself by Self-restraint.Ó That is, he has controlled his lower 
self by moving his consciousness into the higher Self. Until he does so, the lower 
self drags the higher Self along from birth to birth. But when the higher Self comes 
into control of the lower self the situation is di
"
erent indeed. 
Atmic consciousness alone is the antidote to all our ills. When the sadhaka no 
longer acts according to intellectual or instinctual motives, but rather is living out 

in the objective world the inner life of his Self, then and only then is true peace 

gained by him. Acting out of intellectual belief, faith, devotion, or even spiritual 
aspiration, can certainly elevate us, but ultimate peace cannot be found until, 
centered in the Self, we live our life as a manifestation of Spirit. It was the Self 

speaking through Jesus that gave the invitation: ÒCome unto me, all ye that labour 
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of 
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall Þnd rest unto your souls. For my 

yoke is easy, and my burden is lightÓ (Matthew 11:28-30). When the buddhi rests 
in the Atman, peace is inevitable. That is what a Master really is: one who lives ever 
in his Self. Everything else needful follows as a matter of course. And how can this 

come about? Krishna tells us clearly in the next verse.
In tranquility the cessation of all sorrows is produced for him. Truly, for 
the tranquil-minded the buddhi immediately becomes steady (2:65).
Note that the cessation of sorrows is not bestowed on the buddhi yogi, nor does 
he acquire it. Rather, it is 
produced
, it evolves, it grows like an embryo. First is 
conception, then growth and then birth. It is a process that goes in stages. It does 

not come like a lightning strike, but slowly and in an orderly manner, 
for it is a 
natural consequence of the yogiÕs unfoldment through sadhana of his essential nature
. It is 

evolution, not revolution. This is why the idea of instant enlightenment, of instant 

liberation, springs from ignorance of the way things are. For the state of liberation 
through Self-realization is a revelation of the way things have always been. This is 
the real non-dual teaching of the Gita. The steadiness of the buddhi comes 

immediately upon the birth, but the birth takes time. That is what buddhi yoga is 
all aboutÐcoming to birth, truly being born again, really becoming a twice-born 
(dwija).
The uncontrolled
For the undisciplined there is no wisdom, no meditation. For him who 
does not meditate there is no peace or happiness (2:66).
Prabhavananda: ÒThe uncontrolled mind does not guess that the Atman is 
present: how can it meditate? Without meditation, where is peace? Without peace, 
where is happiness?Ó
It is a fact: the man who is undisciplined simply has no buddhiÐhas no 
intelligence or reason. And since the buddhi is so close to the Atman, without its 

being clear and operative there is no possibility of awareness of the AtmanÕs 
existence. Just as there are many levels of intelligence, there are many levels of 
stupidity. Those who neither believe in nor perceive the reality of the Self are stupid 
89
in the higher levels of their being. And you cannot argue or reason with stupidity. 
Either you are spiritually aware or you are not. It comes from deep within, and no 
external factor can produce or a
"
ect it in any way. Argumentation and debate are 
positively meaningless in this area. We should realize this and avoid them.
So Krishna is telling us very forthrightly that the undisciplined and uncontrolled 
mind is no mind at all, spiritually speaking. This is especially signiÞcant at the 

present time when Ògo with the ßowÓ and Òdo what you willÓ are the slogans of the 

unthinking (i.e. the undisciplined and the uncontrolled). How many times do we 
have to hear about how terrible censorship is, when in actuality civilized and lawful 
behavior is nothing but censorship. Nor is this censorship merely a private matter. 

Otherwise there could be no kind of society or culture at all. So the enemies of 
civilization and culture screech nonstop about the evils of censorship and control. 
They express the philosophy of the guilty and the anarchic: the subhuman. They 

truly do wish to live as animals and not as humans. For discipline, control, andÐyesÐ
even self-censorship of behavior are signs of intelligence, of genuine humanity. It is 
also called conscience. A collection of humans form a society and develop a culture 

based on the same principles. Of course, wisdom must be the guide, but in a society 
of true human beings that is always present.
Meditation
What is the paramount purpose of spiritual awareness? Krishna assures us that: 
ÒFor him who does not meditate there is no peace or happiness.Ó By implication 
this statement tells us that a person who develops spiritual consciousness will 
naturally turn to meditation.
This was certainly true in my case. At the age of twenty I did not even have a 
concept of meditation except just pondering some subject. That is mananaÐÞddling 

with the mind. Of dhyanam (true meditation) I had no idea whatsoever. All I knew 
about yoga was what I gleaned from seeing Clifton Webb standing on his head in 

the 1948 movie 
Sitting Pretty
 and saying: ÒWhen I do my yogi [sic] I am just out of 
this world.Ó Also I had seen drawings in 
RipleyÕs Believe It Or Not
 of three yogisÐone 
lying on a bed of nails, one with his arm ÒfrozenÓ upright, and one who had gone 

blind from staring at the sun. Meditation did not come into any of these 
encounters. But one day like the proverbial Òbolt from the blueÓ things changed. 
Here is how I have told about it in an autobiographical sketch:
ÒA door swung open within my conscious mind within a true Ôsplit second in 
eternityÕ and revealed like a vast panorama the full knowledge regarding human 

birth and evolutionÐespecially its necessary consequence: reincarnation.
ÒI also perceived the inevitable passage of the human being into higher 
dimensions of existence for the purpose of evolution far beyond the human status. 

The soul would continue to incarnate in countless forms of ever-increasing 

perfection until the Þnal Great Passage could be made. Then it would return back 
into the InÞnite from which it had originally come forth into the great drama of 
Life. This did not unwind before me or arise within my mind in a continual stream. 
90
Rather, it was fully impressed into my consciousness at one lightning ßash of 
insight.
ÒI walked over to the sofa and sat down without missing a step. There I sat and 
took several hours to assimilate all I had seen in that moment of illumination. If I 

had begun to write what I at last 
knew
, I could have written an entire book without 
stopping.
ÒThe longer I sat, the greater grew the wonder and the delight. This was not 
theological theory from an external forceÐthis was direct knowledge from within. 
My soul knew it, and now my poor brain was trying to grasp it all so no precious 
fragment would be lost. What I had forgotten upon coming into this incarnation 

was once again mine. Delivered from the hell of ignorance regarding the 
fundamental nature of myself and my life, I feasted on the paradisiacal fruit of 
eternal remembrance.
ÒAt the same time awareness of the need to cultivate my innate inner wisdom 
also arose within me. My revelation had demonstrated incontrovertibly to me that 

real knowledge came from within, that ideas gathered from outside sources needed 

to be tested in the laboratory of interior life. External concepts, I realized, should 
only be the stimuli to evoke the spiritÕs eternal wisdom. Therefore I resolved to 
devote at least one hour a day in meditation.Ó
The necessity for meditation and the resolve to do so were the immediate e
"
ects 
of my spiritual insight, of the illumination of my buddhi. I certainly did not have 

Self-realization, but I knew the way to it. And none of this was based on anything 

other than my awakening to the truth of the Self and its evolution toward freedom 
in perfection.
Krishna has presented us with a very simple principle: Meditation is the 
response of the awakening spirit.
Peace and happiness
ÒFor him who does not meditate there is no peace or happiness.Ó Peace and 
happiness are sought by all except the profoundly evil or the profoundly insane. The 
pursuit of happiness was a motivating factor in our American Declaration of 

Independence, and understood as a divine impulse manifesting within the 
individual.
Meditation brings peace and happiness, but meditation is not just one of many 
ways to peace and happiness. Krishna reveals to us that it is the only way.
Shanti
 is peace, calmness, tranquility, and contentment. 
Sukham
 is happiness and 
joy. They are the attributes of the Self, which is why Saint Paul wrote: ÒThe fruit of 
the Spirit isÉjoy [and] peaceÓ (Galatians 5:22). And: ÒThe kingdom of God isÉ
peace and joyÓ (Romans 14:17).
91
Calming the Storm
When the mind is led about by the wandering senses, it carries away the 
understanding like the wind carries away a ship on the waters. The 
intelligent, buddhic awareness of him whose senses are withdrawn from the 
objects of the senses on all sides will be found Þrmly established (2:67-68).
The theme of peace is being continued in these two verses, and its imagery 
brings to mind the following: ÒWhen the even was come, he [Jesus] saith unto 

them, Let us pass over unto the other side. And when they had sent away the 

multitude, they took him even as he was in the ship. And there were also with him 
other little ships. And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into 
the ship, so that it was now full. And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep 

on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we 
perish? And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. 
And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.É And they said one to another, 

What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?Ó (Mark 
4:35-41) Rather than being some special, unique person that we can only admire, 
Jesus was exactly what each one of must become. We, too, must bring peace into 

our stormy minds.
The storm
It is the wind and rain of the senses that Òcarries away oneÕs understanding, as 
the wind carries away a ship on the waters.Ó However much the ÒcaptainÓ of the 
buddhi grasps the wheel and tries to hold the ship steady on its course, the struggle 

is hopeless. This is because, as the verse literally says, the mind wanders after the 
senses and becomes guided by them, losing its intelligent awareness (
prajnam
). 
Caught then in the heaving waters of samsara, of constant birth and death, with 
their attendant anguish, each of us is carried away by the waves, lost and 
disoriented completely.
Swami Prabhavananda renders this verse: ÒThe wind turns a ship from its course 
upon the waters: the wandering winds of the senses cast manÕs mind adrift and turn 

his better judgment from its course.Ó ÒBetter judgmentÓ is the translation Swami 
Prabhavananda uses for prajnam. Prajnam means both consciousness and 

awareness, and includes the knowledge gained by the evolving bodies of the Atman. 
Just as Krishna has described before that we lose Òmemory,Ó the lesson of 
experience, it is prajnam that we lose.
The statement that we are turned from our course points out a basic truth: by 
nature we are all Òon course,Ó and our drifting is unnatural. Therefore when we set 

our wills to recover our course, there is no doubt that we will succeed. It is 

inevitable. In the Gita Arjuna says to Krishna: ÒThe mind is truly unstable, 
troubling, strong and unyielding. I believe it is hard to controlÐas hard to control as 
92
the windÓ (6:34). And Krishna will agree. But the mind must be subdued, 
nevertheless. That is easy to say, but 
how
? ÒThe awareness of him whose senses are 
withdrawn from the objects of the senses on all sides will be found Þrmly 

established.Ó And how do we e
"
ectively say, ÒPeace, be stillÓ to the senses?
The mind
We must understand that the senses are simply instruments (indriyas) of the 
mind, that although they Òcast manÕs mind adriftÓ this is the reversal of the natural 
order, that it is the mind that is meant to ÒdriveÓ the senses, the way a charioteer 
drives the horses that pull the chariot. Krishna surely had in mind this passage from 

the Upanishads:
ÒKnow that the Self is the rider, and the body the chariot; that the intellect is the 
charioteer, and the mind the reins. The senses, say the wise, are the horses; the 

roads they travel are the mazes of desire. The wise call the Self the enjoyer when he 
is united with the body, the senses, and the mind. When a man lacks discrimination 
and his mind is uncontrolled, his senses are unmanageable, like the restive horses 

of a charioteer. But when a man has discrimination and his mind is controlled, his 
senses, like the well-broken horses of a charioteer, lightly obey the rein. He who 
lacks discrimination, whose mind is unsteady and whose heart is impure, never 

reaches the goal, but is born again and again. But he who has discrimination, whose 
mind is steady and whose heart is pure, reaches the goal, and having reached it is 
born no more. The man who has a sound understanding for charioteer, a controlled 

mind for reinsÐhe it is that reaches the end of the journey, the supreme abode of 
Vishnu, the all pervadingÓ (Katha Upanishad 1:3:3-9).
The awakened mind
Krishna expresses it to Arjuna this way:
The man of restraint is awake in what is night for all beings. That in which 
all beings are awake is night for the sage who truly sees (2:69).
By ÒawakeÓ Krishna means having the awareness centered in an area of 
existence. There are, then, two kinds of minds: those that are awake in the Atman 

and those that are awake in the senses, consciousnesses centered in the spirit and 
consciousnesses centered in matter. And of course, to be centered in something will 
cause us to be identiÞed with it. Some identify with the immutable, imperishable 

Self, and some identify with the ever-changing, perishable world and the body 
which links us to that world. The Self, on the other hand, links us to the Supreme 
Self, Brahman. Both types are awake, having reached the evolutionary level of 

humanity, but the di
"
erence is vast, even abysmal.
How Jesus saw it
Jesus speaks of the awake mind in this way: ÒThe light of the body is the eye: if 
therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye 
be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee 
93
be darkness, how great is that darkness!Ó (Matthew 6:22-23) Two words in these 
verses are translated Òlight.Ó The Þrst is 
luchnos
, which means a lamp or something 
that gives light. The other is 
foteinos
, which means to be radiant or full of light. 
ÒBodyÓ is 
soma
, which not only means ÒbodilyÓ as well, but also interestingly 
enough means 
slave
! For the body is a slave to the world and the senses.
 Ophthalmos
 
means both the eye and the faculty of vision.
Now things get really interesting. The word translated ÒsingleÓ (
aplous
) does not 
mean one in a numerical sense, but in the sense of uniÞed, of having come into 
oneness with something. Its root is 
pleko
 which means to be twined together with 
something. The opposite of aplous is 
poneros
, which though translated Òevil,Ó does 
not mean what it does in our time. ÒEvilÓ was used at the time of the King JamesÕ 

translators in the sense of misfortune and harm, as well as negative moral 
condition. It also means to be degenerated from essential character or virtue.
Putting this all together we see the meaning of Jesus. When the consciousness, 
the mind, is united to the Self, even our body is Þlled with the light of spirit. If, 

however, the mind is drawn away from atmic awareness and turned toward its 

antithesis, the world of the senses and mortality, then both body and mind are 
plunged into darkness. Consciousness is not extinguished, but is subverted, 
evoking the words of Jesus: ÒIf therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how 

great is that darkness!Ó In other words, we become conscious of unconsciousness, 
we ÒseeÓ blindness. How great, then, is that darkness. For it is utter annihilation of 
the purpose of our existence.
Two darknesses
There are two forms of darkness. To the person awake in the awareness of the 
Self the world and life of the senses is rightly perceived to be darkness and death. 
But to the dead-alive person who is absorbed in the false life of the senses, the 
knowledge and knowing of the Self is absolute nothingness. Either he does not 

believe in the spirit, or he considers it thoroughly irrelevant, even disruptive to his 
desires and goals. Both of these individuals consider themselves wise, but only the 
one with atmic vision is really a knower of the truth. It is completely worthless for 

these two to dialogue or discuss. Each must pursue what he ÒseesÓ until it reveals 
its true nature to him. Both need the freedom to do this. They should leave each 
other alone, free to follow the way they have chosen.
Beyond disturbance
Like the ocean, which becomes Þlled yet remains unmoved and stands still 
as the waters enter it, he whom all desires enter and who remains unmoved 
attains peaceÐnot so the man who is full of desire (2:70).
As the ocean is una
"
ected by the ßowing of rivers into it, so the restrained and 
awakened mind, the mind that has been returned to its true center, the Self, 

receives a multitude of desire-impulses, yet makes no response. This is the real 
meaning of PatanjaliÕs deÞnition of yoga: the non-responsiveness of the mind 
94
(chittaÐthe mind substance) to outer stimuli. The illumined individual does not 
become inert or unconscious, but becomes unmoved by that which perpetually 
agitates and conditions the mind of the ignorant, especially those who are 
kamakami
Ðdesiring not just the objects of desire, but desiring the state of desire. 
For:
He who abandons all desires attains peace, acts free from longing, 
indi
"
erent to possessions and free from egotism (2:71).
Ego and egotism are the twin roots of desire. If they are eliminated, desire 
becomes impossible.
The Þnal word
This is the divine state. Having attained this, he is not deluded. Fixed in it 
even at the time of death, he attains Brahmanirvana (2:72).
Prabhavananda: ÒThis is the state of enlightenment in Brahman: a man does not 
fall back from it into delusion. Even at the moment of death he is alive in that 
enlightenment: Brahman and he are one.Ó
These words are too sublime to need comment.
95
First Steps in Karma Yoga
In the latter part of the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita Krishna has given 
us a perfect portrait of a man possessed of the true Brahmajnana, the knowledge of 
Brahman. It is far from that of a devoted warrior in the heat of battle. Wherefore 
Arjuna asks, protesting:
Arjuna said: If it is your conviction that knowledge is better than action, 
then why do you urge me to engage in this terrible action? With speech that 

seems equivocal you confuse my mind. Tell me surely this one thing: How 

should I attain the highest good? (3:1-2).
Buddhi means both intellect and intelligence. So Krishna is saying that 
intelligent insight, or jnana, is far superior to mere external action, or karma. But 

Arjuna protests that this emphasis on buddhi is confusing his buddhi! Emphasis on 
intelligence confuses his intellect! But he is not so confused that he does not 
understand that he needs to know the way to the highest good.
The two paths
In response Krishna begins: 
The Holy Lord said: In this world there is a two-fold path taught by me 
long ago: knowledge, the yoga of the Sankhyas, and action, the yoga of the 

yogis (3:3).
Sri Ramakrishna often said that basically there were two yogas: karma yoga, the 
yoga of action, and mano yoga, the yoga of the mindÐbuddhi yoga, or jnana yoga.
For some reason through the intervening centuries people who are not correctly 
following either path insist that there is only one right or best way of the two, but 
Krishna is not really setting an either/or situation before Arjuna. Instead, he is 
speaking of two forms of emphasisÐsome develop better by focussing on knowledge 

(jnana yoga), and some develop better by focussing on action (karma yoga). But 
both engage in jnana and karma simultaneouslyÐit is only in the degree of one or 
the other that the di
"
erence is to be found.
It is sadly true that through misunderstanding we Þnd people who think that 
one should be cultivated to the complete exclusion of the other. This is not the 

intention of Krishna, as we shall see. After all, if each one leads to enlightenment, 

how can there be a ÒbestÓ? In fact, how can they be exclusionary if they lead to the 
same goal?
Temperament is the deciding factor as to which of the paths to emphasize. It is 
really quite simple: we should take up the path that seems natural to us. And if 

further on down the path it seems natural to switch over to the other emphasis, 
that, too, is all right, for in some lives we have to take up more than one unÞnished 

strand and complete them. It is natural for us to move in many directions 
throughout our life. Since there is only one God and therefore only one Goal, 
96
whatever we do will move us forward along the path. ÒIn whatever way men resort 
to me do I thus reward them. It is my path which men follow everywhereÓ (4:11). ÒI 
am the GoalÓ (9:18).
In our evolution through many lives we take up many approaches that we do not 
complete for some reason. These remain unfulÞlled, and it is necessary that we 

complete them or in some way combine and resolve them. So it is natural to be 
drawn to di
"
erent attitudes and approaches at di
"
erent phases of our spiritual 

development. A test of infants found that they instinctively knew exactly what they 
needed to eat at the time and would go right for those foods, including things with 
unpleasant taste. The same is true of our own heart. We know the way we should 

go, and to deny it is to deny our inner divinity.
How not to go about it
Not by abstaining from actions does a man attain the state beyond action, 
and not by mental renunciation alone does he approach to perfection. Truly, 
no one for even a moment exists without doing action. Each person is 

compelled to perform action, even against his will, by the gunas born of 
prakriti (3:4-5).
Here ÒactivityÓ includes mental action, conscious and subconscious. The law of 
karma consists of two forces: the impulse to act and the certainty of reaping the 

consequences of all acts. It is both cause and e
"
ect. And it is underlain by a more 
profound law, the law of evolution. Evolution is e
"
ected by actionÐaction that 

informs and improves, but action nonetheless. So action is an absolute necessity for 
all beings.
Krishna assures us that inaction is impossibleÐeven for God, so why not for the 
godlike? When we are in a moving vehicle we may not want to move or see the 

need for it, but move we shall. In the same way, the moment we enter into relative 
existence, into prakriti, we begin moving and we never stop until we transcend 

relativity and attain the Absolute. Therefore the gunas of prakriti, sattwa, rajas, and 
tamas, combine to force us to act. In this matter there is no free willÐwe cannot 
choose to act or not. The only freedom we have is to decide how we will act. This is 

why all religions place such importance on virtuous or right action. Act we must, so 
we must act rightly.
Only those who erroneously suppose the inner and outer, the spiritual and the 
material, to be not only di
"
erent but in opposition to one another, think that 

abstention from action is the way to perfection or that escape is liberation. This is 
why the Gita is so incredibly important. It shows that right activity is as necessary 

for inner enlightenment as the more obvious means such as japa and meditation.
In the next chapter Krishna will speak of Òthe royal seers (rajarishis).Ó The holy 
kings who administered kingdoms and yet attained the knowledge of Brahman are 

the ideal he puts before us. He does this for two reasons: 1) so we will not think 
that avoiding activity and involvement is the way to enlightenment, and 2) so we 
will not use our earthly responsibilities and ties as excuses for not exerting 
97
ourselves to the utmost in the pursuit of liberation. How many times have spiritual 
layabouts talked to me about how God had given them Òall these responsibilitiesÓ 
and consequently they were dispensed from seeking God. It is just the opposite. 
God intends for us to seek and Þnd him in the midst of those responsibilitiesÐthat 

is their purpose. They are not barriers or obstacles, but doors to pass through into 
higher life. One man actually told me that he could not look after his spiritual life 
because God had given him children whose spiritual lives he was to cultivate! 

Having nothing himself, he was going to supply them. He also overlooked the fact 
that God had done no such thing as ÒgiveÓ them to himÐhe had traveled all the way 
to Asia and adopted them. Sad that he would use them as pretexts for neglecting 

his own evolution. As Yogananda said: ÒHuman beings are so skillful in their 
ignorance!Ó
The essence is this: since we are forced to act, we should act in a freeing manner, 
not in a binding manner.
What we are really thinking and wanting
Whatever we do, it is our inner intention and desire that determines the 
ultimate result. Krishna explains this:
He who restrains actionÕs organs while yet revolving in his mind thoughts 
of objects of the senses, is deluded, a hypocrite (3:6).
And we will see that what he really wants will eventually come to him. Then he 
will no longer be a hypocrite, unless he hides his involvement with them. 
Sometimes a ÒfallÓ is really a matter of honesty.
Sanatana Dharma is markedly di
"
erent from other philosophies. They all 
threaten, cajole, and persuade people to join their ranks and Òbe good.Ó True 

Dharma, in contrast, says: ÒStudy yourself carefully, and if you do not want what we 
have to o
"
er, then do not botherÐyou will not get anywhere anyway. But when the 
time comes that you really want the higher life, come see us.Ó Sri Ramakrishna said 

that by always being truthful a person ascends to higher life, even liberation. There 
must be honesty in all things, including religion. Of course, there does come a 
pivotal moment, a midway point, where the individual must say: ÒI really want what 

is bad for me, but even more I want to rid myself of such a foolish Ôwant.Õ 
Henceforth I will cut it o
"
 and cultivate the right kind of Ôwant.ÕÓ That is not 
hypocrisy, but liberating discipline, because he openly admits his inner desire. But it 

must be self-initiated, not an e
"
ect of any external factor, including another person.
We are the savior
The only savior we will ever have is ourselfÐour own creative will. Later Krishna 
will say: ÒThe self can truly be a friend of the selfÓ (6:5). This is because it is our 
will alone that creates our entire life in all its aspects. As a Buddhist text says: ÒI 

have nothing but my actions; I shall have nothing but my actions.Ó This is why 
Krishna also said: ÒBrahman is to be attained by him who always sees Brahman in 
actionÓ (4:24). What you will is what you (really) want; what you want is what you 
98
(really) will. Hence, Krishna says:
He who by the mind controls the senses, and yet is unattached while 
engaging actionÕs organs in action, is superior (3:7).
When we really understand that every action has union with God as its core 
purpose and carry out each action with that perspective, then everything we do is 
genuine yoga, uniting us with God.
Perform your duty, for action is far better than non-action. Even 
maintaining your body cannot be done without action (3:8).
Liberating action
The world is bound by the actions not done for sake of sacriÞce. Hence for 
sacriÞce you should act without attachment (3:9).
Up and Doing should be our motto. But up and doing for God, for our Higher 
Self and the Supreme Self.
99
From the Beginning to the End
In the beginning along with mankind Prajapati created sacriÞce and said: 
ÒBy this shall you increase: this shall be the granter of desiresÓ (3:10).
Life is to be lived according to its purpose: the ultimate evolution/liberation of 
the individual. When life is lived in this way, every act is an o
"
ering to Spirit, both 
individual and Absolute. To live for the short-term goals of the ego, conditioned 
completely by our present status in just this one limited incarnation, is folly to the 
point of insanity. But we do just that, binding ourselves tighter and closer to the 

wheel of birth and death. Like ScroogeÕs partner, Jacob Marley, we forge chains 
which we bear with us for untold ages.
ÒIt is my life and I will do what I wantÓ is one of the stupidest things a human 
being can say, except, perhaps, for: ÒI donÕt see the need for a God.Ó Both are 

expressions of an insular ignorance almost cosmic in scope. Every act must be 
begun and carried out within the perspective of our personal evolution. For our life 

is really an extension of the Divine LifeÐnothing else.
It was only logical, then, for Saint Paul to write: ÒI beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacriÞce, holy, 

acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to 
this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove 
what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of GodÓ (Romans 11:1-2). That 

is, we must not live according to the illusions of the world, but rather transform 
ourselves by living in the context of sacriÞce, of giving our life to the search for the 
Highest. For to do so will accomplish the divine plan (will). As Saint Paul also 

wrote: ÒThis is the will of God, even your sanctiÞcationÓ (Thessalonians 4:3).
Much earlier Patanjali taught in the Yoga Sutras that IshwarapranidhanaÐo
"
ering 
of the life to GodÐwas the path to the superconscious experience of samadhi.
Why?
Why, then, did Brahma the Creator (Prajapati is one of his titles) tell the Þrst 
humans that living in sacriÞce (o
"
ering) would result in prosperity and fullÞl 
desire? Because when we live in harmony with the divine plan the entire cosmos 
works in concert to accomplish our perfectionÐwhich includes the supplying of all 

we need to live both the earthly and the spiritual life. Those who live in this manner 
only desire that which furthers their enlightenment. Krishna implies this elsewhere 
in the Bhagavad Gita also.
It is noteworthy that this verse implies that we do not gain by grabbing but by 
giving, not by taking, but by o
"
eringÐgiving and o
"
ering to God, that is, and 

ultimately thereby to our true Self. It is not God that fulÞlls our desires, but our 

sacriÞce-o
"
ering. No wonder Jesus said: ÒIt is more blessed to give than to 
receiveÓ (Acts 20:35). It is really a matter of karma. ÒCast thy bread upon the 
100
waters: for thou shalt Þnd it after many daysÓ (Ecclesiastes 11:1). ÒWhatsoever a 
man soweth, that shall he also reapÓ (Galatians 6:7).
The ÒgodsÓ
ÒMay you foster the gods by this, and may the gods then foster you. Then, 
each the others fostering, you shall attain highest welfareÓ (3:11).
Who are Òthe godsÓ (devas)? They are not to be confused with those of lesser 
(though powerful) evolution that, in the grip of ego, reward and punish those who 
please or displease them. Such deluded beings have been worshipped in various 
forms throughout the history of the world.
The devas spoken of by Krishna are highly evolved beings that have control over 
physical and astral forces, and who supervise the operations of the universe. When 

human beings live in accordance with material laws they aid in the processes of 

creation and are blessed by the devas, for their help in their work. Conversely, they 
hinder the devas when they break natural laws and despoil the world around them. 
Krishna is advocating both a material and a spiritual ecology.
But there is another, more personal aspect of the devas. The higher faculties of 
the human being are also devas, Òshining ones,Ó for they enable the person to 

understand outer and inner phenomena and give him the capacity to direct or alter 

such phenomena. When we live in accordance with our true nature and do those 
things that support and further our evolutionary impulse we are Òfostering the 
gods.Ó Our material nature becomes an assist to higher consciousness. It is only 

those who are violating nature, inner and outer, that complain of the human 
condition and this world as obstacles or injurious.
Actually, the words ÒnourishÓ and ÒfosterÓ are both very inadequate and 
unsatisfactory. The word 
bhavyata
 really cannot be translated by a single English 
term. Bhavyata means: Òmay you cherish,Ó Òmay you foster,Ó Òmay you produce,Ó 
and Òmay you increase the well-being of.Ó Literally, it means Òmay you cause to be.Ó 

The implication is that for the unaware and ignorant neither the devas in the 
universe nor the inner faculties exist. A long time ago I heard the challenge: ÒIf God 
is God, then let him BE God!Ó The idea is that even God is only potentially God in 

our lives until we actively ÒmakeÓ him God, the way a king is not really king until 
he is o
!
cially crowned. So if the gods are to exist outside and inside us in a 
meaningful way, we have to make them gods by the practice of yoga. A part of the 

making is the cultivation of the capacity to perceive them. For this, meditation is 
essential.
The highest aspect of this is making our own selves into devas, into shining 
ones, by invoking the light of our eternal Self. Until then we do not exist in the 

fullest sense. We need to bring ourselves into being.
Fostering the gods
ÒThe gods, fostered by sacriÞce, will give you desired enjoyments. But he 
who enjoys the godsÕ gifts without o
"
ering to them is a thiefÓ (3:12).
101
This, too, is a matter of cosmic and individual import. Those who live according 
to the Eternal Dharma Þnd that they receive the fulÞllment of all needs. Those who 
exploit both the world and their own bodies and minds are thieves that shall Þnd 
themselves imprisoned and impoverished by this world and by their own corrupted 

nature.
The good who eat the sacriÞcial remains are freed from all evils. The 
wicked eat their own evil who cook food only for themselves (3:13).
In India there is the concept of prasad (literally: grace), that which has been Þrst 
o
"
ered to God and then partaken of by the devotee. It is believed that the essence of 

the o
"
ering has been received by God and replaced with divine energy which greatly 

puriÞes and uplifts whoever partakes of the prasad. Miracles, such as healing, have 
taken place at the consumption of prasad, and many notice a deÞnite increase in 
spiritual awareness after eating prasad.
That there is a basis to this was demonstrated in an ashram in the Himalayan 
foothills. A resident rat, known as ÒMotherÕs Bhakta,Ó would only eat prasad. This 

was tested many times by putting identical items where he could Þnd them. Some 

would be prasad and others would be ordinary food. He never touched the regular 
items but ate only the prasad. This occurred for many years.
Our whole life should be prasad. First it should be o
"
ered sincerely to God and 
ordered accordingly. Then what we enjoy as ÒleftoversÓ will accrue to our spiritual 

beneÞt. Although the cooking of food is the example used in this verse, the 
principle applies to every aspect of life. Everything we do should have the prime 

motive of our spiritual perfection, our liberation.
If we can live in the attitude of our life being an o
"
ering it will profoundly a
"
ect 
us. For one thing, it will keep us from that which is unÞt to o
"
er God: unworthy or 

selÞsh deeds or the injury of others. Taking this idea seriously can transform our 
lives and deliver us from mishaps and follies.
To realize that we are not living 
our
 life but the Divine Life which has been 
bestowed on us is a foundation stone of intelligent living.
ÒFoodÓ
Food is much more than mere comestibles. The Upanishads speak a great deal 
about food (annam) as a metaphysical concept. The Taittiriya Upanishad says: 
ÒFrom food are born all creatures, which live upon food and after death return to 

food. Food is the chief of all things. It is therefore said to be medicine for all 
diseases of the body. Those who worship food as Brahman gain all material objects. 
From food are born all beings which, being born, grow by food. All beings feed 

upon food, and, when they die, food feeds upon themÓ (Taittiriya Upanishad 2:1:3). 
Here we see that ÒfoodÓ represents the cosmic life principle: Brahman itself. This 
really could not be otherwise, since Brahman is all that exists.
In the Gita, ÒfoodÓ is the life that is lived as prasad. So Krishna continues:
From food all beings are produced, and from rain all food is produced. 
From sacriÞce there comes down rain. From action is born sacriÞce. 
102
Understand that action arises from Brahma, Brahma arises from the 
Imperishable. Hence the all-pervading Brahma is eternally established in 
sacriÞce (3:14-15).
This second part (verse Þfteen) rightly seems a bit confusing. Brahman is the 
Absolute, the Self-Existent, yet we are told that Brahman arises from the 

Imperishable. ArenÕt they the same thing? Yes, in the ultimate sense. But Krishna is 
speaking of the distinction between Divinity that is present (immanent) in creation 

and guiding creation and our evolution within it, and Divinity that is transcendent, 
completely outside or beyond relativity. It is the same Divinity, but two aspects of 
that One. In the other spiritual writings of India they are called Brahman and the 

Mahat Tattwa. But when Vyasa wrote the Gita a single word, Brahman, was used for 
both.
The teaching of this verse is that the consciousness, the seed of divine 
realization, is inherent in a life lived as an o
"
ering to the Supreme.
The foolish
Before Krishna tells us about the life-path of the wise, he disposes of the foolish 
in a single short verse:
He who here on the earth turns not the wheel thus set in motion, lives full 
of sense delights, maliciously and uselessly (3:16).
Basically, the idea is that those who live for their personal gratiÞcation, with no 
wider interest or perspective, and who are oriented toward the body and its 
addictions (falsely called ÒneedsÓ by the body-involved), injure both themselves and 
others, and really live to no real purpose, for death in a moment sweeps away 
everything they value, leaving them only with their addictions to dominate them in 

future lives. A horrible prospect, indeed. They are truly the living dead.
As Krishna said in the last chapter: ÒWhen the mind is led about by the 
wandering senses, it carries away the understanding like the wind carries away a 

ship on the waters. The [intelligentÐbuddhic] awareness of him whose senses are 
withdrawn from the objects of the senses on all sides will be found Þrmly 
established. The man of restraint is awake in what is night for all beings; that in 

which all beings are awake is night for the sage who [truly] seesÓ (2:67-69).
Freedom
He who is content only in the Self, who is satisÞed in the Self, who is 
pleased only in the Self: for him there is no need to act. He has no purpose at 
all in action or in non-action, and he has no need of anyone for any purpose 

whatsoever (3:17-18).
When our consciousness is centered in the Self we are out of the game and 
home free. As Sri Ramakrishna frequently said, using the game of hide-and-seek as 

a metaphor: ÒIf you play hide and seek there is no fear once you touch the Ôgranny.ÕÓ 
And: ÒIf you can but touch the Ôgranny,Õ you can live anywhere after you have 
turned into gold.Ó
103
In atmic consciousness we become free from all compulsion to actÐand equally 
free from any compulsion to inaction. We are truly free, able to act or not act, 
having transcended that duality by becoming its masters, not by becoming 
incapacitated in relation to them. Further, we are absolutely free and independent of 

all others, living in unity with our Self within Brahman.
NeverthelessÉ
Lest we fall into inertia, considering it a virtue, Krishna continues:
Therefore, constantly unattached perform that which is your duty. Indeed 
by unattached action man attains the Supreme. Indeed, perfection was 
attained through action alone by King Janaka and others. For the maintenance 
of the world, as an example you should act (3:19-20).
Janaka was a royal saint mentioned in the Upanishads. He lived unattached, 
acting solely for the welfare of others, as must we. This lofty motivation is now 

expounded by Krishna.
Whatever the best of men doesÐthis and thatÐthus other men do. 
Whatever the standard that he sets, that is what the world shall follow. I have 

no duty whatsoever in the three worlds, nor anything that must be attained, 
nevertheless I engage in action. Indeed, if I did not tirelessly engage at all in 

action, then mankind everywhere would follow my example. If I did not 
perform action these worlds would perish, and I would be the cause of 
confusion. I would destroy these people. As the unwise act, attached to 

action, so the wise should act, unattached, intending to maintain the welfare 
of the world (3:21-25).
Here Krishna speaks from the perspective of God, not just as an enlightened 
person, though he was a major leader of society at that time.
Showing the way
Now we come to a supreme counsel:
One should not unsettle the minds of the ignorant attached to action. The 
wise should cause them to enjoy all actions, himself engaged in their 
performance (3:26).
Movement (action) is life, whereas cessation of all movement is death. So it is 
natural for human beings to engage in action. The trouble is in the motive. So 

Krishna tells us that the wise must also workÐoften even more than othersÐto show 
how action should be carried on. Here, too, we see that the inner disposition is the 
secret. To engage in action intent only on the action itself or on the desired result is 

ignorance. Action done with the consciousness directed toward God as the ultimate 
ÒresultÓ is wisdom. Action is then the path to freedom rather than the way of 
bondage.
104
The Real ÒDoersÓ
Every action is really performed by the gunas
In all situations actions are performed by the gunas of Prakriti. Those with 
ego-deluded mind think: ÒI am the doerÓ (3:27).
The Atman, the Spirit-self, is pure consciousness, and as such has only one 
function: witnessing the movements of prakriti, the creative life energies. The 
mechanics of this situation are virtually as incomprehensible as the Atman itself. In 
the Bhagavad Gita the energies are spoken of as surrounding or encompassing the 

Atman which experiences being at the center of them. But they are also declared to 
be utterly apart from the Atman, which witnesses them as totally outside it.
However that may be, Krishna is saying that all action is merely the movementÐ
the combining, separation, and recombining in ever-changing patternsÐof the three 

modes of energy behavior, the three gunas. Just as there are three primary colors 
from which all colors originate, in the same way the three gunas are the origin of all 

activity.
Man, deluded by his egoism, thinks: ÒI am the doerÓ
The witnesses of a motion picture, knowing full well that it is only a play of light 
on the screen, yet respond to it as being real. Each of us is even more enthralled 
within the motion picture of our daily experience, actually believing that we are 

acting and producing its changing movements.
Sankhya philosophy, the philosophy expounded by Krishna in the Gita, tells us 
that although we do not literally act within prakriti, the appearance of action caused 

by the movements of the gunas is produced by usÐby our mere proximity to 
prakriti. We can understand this by the simile of modern gadgetry. There are 
devices which are activated just by someone approaching themÐall the way from 

talking and moving Þgures to doors that open at our approach. In the same way 
prakriti is stimulated into motion by our approaching it in our awareness. It literally 
is the way we look at it that matters. Those who can look upon prakriti as detached 

witnesses will Þnd themselves no longer part of the whirling movement that 
comprises the drama of life. This is really beyond the comprehension of the 
ordinary intellect, but the yogi who has clariÞed and stabilized his mind will 

understand to a great degree, for his outer life is seen to be an extension of his 
inner life. Meditation is the most viable School of Life.
Understanding the gunas
The gunas are not only three modes of material energy behavior, they are also 
three forms of material (matter-oriented) consciousness. So Krishna continues:
But he who knows the truth about the gunas and action thinks: ÒThe 
gunas act in the gunas.Ó Thinking thus, he is not attached (3:28).
105
Krishna is not just giving us interesting facts about phenomenal existence; his 
intention is to bring us to detachment from that to which we never have been nor 
ever can be really attached. All attachment is only an illusion of the ignorant heart. 
He calls us to simple reality, not to some high-ßown mystical state.
Guna guneshu vartanta
 means: ÒThe gunas act in the gunas.Ó Swami 
Prabhavananda renders it: ÒGunas are merely attaching themselves to gunas.Ó 

Swami Swarupananda: ÒGunas as senses merely rest on gunas as objects.Ó Swami 

Sivananda: ÒThe Gunas as senses move amidst the gunas as the sense-objects.Ó
A serious responsibility
Those deluded by the gunas of prakriti are attached to the actions of the 
gunas. The knower of the whole truth should not disturb the foolish of partial 
knowledge (3:29).
This is almost universally disregarded in India, where the monastics have 
gloriÞed inaction as wisdom (jnana) and action as ignorance. The result has been a 

shameful stagnation and idle-mindedness in themselves and those they inßuence. 

No one can count the number of wandering idlers falsely called sannyasis. The only 
thing they have renounced is responsibility.
ÒThose deluded by the gunas of prakriti are attached to the actions of the 
gunas.Ó Why, then, would you not wean them from external involvements, from 

constant action? Because it is a matter of maturity. Just as the fruit should ripen 
before being taken from the tree, in the same way each individual must evolve to 

the point where he sees for himself the truth of thingsÐnot blindly believing in what 
others tell him about reality. Until then, just as with a child or mentally impaired 
adult, we have to speak to him on his level in his terms.
The wise must engage in right action so as to teach by example and incite even 
the ignorant to emulation. At such a stage actions certainly do speak louder than 

words. The infant must grow and learn to walk, talk, feed himself, and think 

objectively before we educate him and speak philosophically to him. It is the same 
way in practical life. Only those who learn the right way to act can learn the right 
way to withdraw from action.
106
Our Spiritual Marching Orders
There are many reasons why a battleÞeld was the appropriate place for the 
teachings of the Bhagavad Gita to be spoken. Life itself is a battle, and the world is 
the battleÞeld. Those who are developed enough in consciousness to take upon 
themselves the responsibility for their evolution and ultimate liberation are 

certainly warriors. Krishna is the voice of the Supreme CommanderÐour own divine 
Self and Brahman the Absolute, the Self of our Self. He issues to us our marching 
orders in a single verse:
Renouncing all actions in me, intent on the Supreme Spirit, free from 
desire and Òmine,Ó free from fever: Þght! (3:30)
It is important to realize that good intentions, dedication, and enthusiasm are 
not su
!
cient in the spiritual battle. That is why Krishna leaves the order to Þght for 
the last. Here they are.
Renouncing all actions in me.
 The Sanskrit term 
sannyasya
 means relinquishing, 
entrusting, and renouncing. All apply here. First, we give up or give over to God all 

that we do, saying: ÒThis is all done by your power, by your instruments, by me who 
also am yours. So may this all be your doing.Ó This is a very important attitude. We 

entrust our actions to God when we o
"
er them and rely on God to make everything 
come out all right. When I was little we used to sing in church: ÒWhen you have 
done your best, let Jesus do the rest, 
and keep your eyes upon the goal
.Ó I did not 
understand what I was singing, but many years later after reading the Gita I did. 
Reliance on God is often the secret of detached action. Renouncing all action has 
pretty much been covered, but it is very much an attitude of indi
"
erenceÐnot being 

numb in the mind or alienated from our surroundings, but being so intent on God 
that our actions are no longer ours but GodÕs. And if God is not interested, neither 
are we. So no problem. This gives profound peace of mind.
Everything we do must be seen as serving a single purpose: the revelation of the 
Divine Self within our own Self. Obviously InÞnity needs nothing, and the idea of 

giving It anything is absurd. But since the intention of the Absolute in manifesting 

the relative is our ascension to complete freedom in spirit, whatever we do to 
further that can be considered dedicated to God. Here, too, Krishna is speaking of 
Ishwarapranidhana, the o
"
ering of the life to God.
Intent on the Supreme Spirit
.
 
Adhyatma chetasa
 means consciousness absorbed in the 
Self within (adhyatman), both the individual Self and the Cosmic Self. No need to 

look for Þre in water or dampness in Þre. The Self and the world mutually exclude 

one another. So we need not ßee the world or even reject it; we need only turn 
within and enter the realm of the spirit. Then like the chickÕs shell the world will 
fall away, no longer able to conÞne or hold on to us. ÒThis I say then, Walk in the 

Spirit, and ye shall not fulÞll the lust of the ßeshÓ (Galatians 5:16).
107
Free from desire and selÞshness.
 There is no use in facing west to see the rising sun. 
In the same way there is no point in looking to material existence for fulÞllment of 
that deep longing which impels us into so many frantic and fruitless searches from 
life to life. We do not expect a stone to ßy or sing to us. In the same way we must 

not expect from the world the very thing it prevents us from attaining.
The ego only exists in the worldÐor rather in the mind that is absorbed in the 
world and identiÞes with the world, thinking the Self is a part of it, capable of 

a
"
ecting it and of being a
"
ected by it. That is a sure gateway to frustration and false 
assurances. The only way to be free from the sense of ego is to become identiÞed 
with the Self.
Free from fever.
 Ignorance is the root of all our problems and their attendant 
su
"
erings. Unfortunately, it is not a passive condition like blindness or deafness, 

but actively produces the fever of a myriad delusions and desires which impel us 

into a myriad of thoughts and acts that proliferate into more delusions and pains. It 
is horrible to contemplate, engendering in us a sense of utter helplessness and 
hopelessness. But that mistaken view is the ultimate delusion which, if we accept it, 

will ensure our perpetual confusion and misery.
The truth is that all our delusions and su
"
ering are illusions, having no 
substance other than our own mind or any power other than our own intellect and 

will. They are dreams from which we can awaken. No external force can produce 
this awakeningÐwe must do it ourself. Teachers can instruct us in the means and 
ways of awakening but the cure must be totally accomplished by us.
Ignorance is only a shell, a veneer. Beneath it lies the eternal truth of our Self. 
The shell need only be cracked open and shaken o
"
. Just as the chick cracks its shell 
from within and pushes its way outward, breaking and casting aside the shell, so 

are we to do, becoming, like Buddha, Self-awakened.
Fight!
 When ignorance and delusion are vanquished, dependence on the world 
ended, consciousness of the Self established, the sense of ego dissolved, and all our 

life seen as an o
"
ering unto God, we have not attained the goalÐwe have only then 
become capable of Þghting and conquering the cosmic evil that has dominated and 
enslaved us from the moment we became an atom of hydrogen.
One of the greatest errors of spiritual life is mistaking mere spiritual Þtness for 
spiritual perfection. Saint Clement of Alexandria lamented that already in the 

beginning of the third century the Christian Church mistook for perfection and the 

end of the struggle that which at the time of Jesus was looked upon as just the 
beginning, only the readiness to begin the path to perfection. The same is true in all 
religions today. Those who are hardly qualiÞed novices are acclaimed masters and 

even avatars. This is a tragedy beyond calculation.
But we need not fall into the illusion. We can and will move onward to the real 
battle; and we will win.
Fighting is going forward, but many people get stuck on their successes in 
spiritual life rather than pushing onward to better things. There are people who sit 

and rhapsodize about an extraordinary meditation instead of keeping on and having 
108
even more remarkable meditations. Or they go on and on about some incredible 
incident in their spiritual search, not realizing that they are no longer searching but 
mired in self-congratulation. It is good to be pleased with our spiritual life and 
progress, but that must be a stimulus to keep on moving into new territory. 

Alexander the Great, whose kingdom was but a fraction of the earth, sat and wept, 
lamenting that he had no more lands to conquer. We must avoid his small-
mindedness and press on.
No matter how good things are at the moment, they can become betterÐeven to 
the extent that what we are impressed with now will in time seem very elementary, 

and even negligible.
109
Freedom From Karma
Do you remember the television ad that asked: ÒWhy trade a headache for an 
upset stomach?Ó? Many people trade fear of sin and hell for fear of bad karma and 
bad karmic consequences. That is a perfect example of JesusÕ statement that Òno 
man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles, and 

be spilled, and the bottles shall perish. But new wine must be put into new bottles; 
and both are preservedÓ (Luke 5:37, 38).
It is pointless to adopt new ideas while retaining the old attitudes that were 
consistent with or shaped by the old rejected ideas. The resulting inconsistency will 

have a negative, even a disruptive, e
"
ect. As Jesus said before the passage just cited: 
ÒNo man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the 

new maketh a rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with 
the oldÓ (Luke 5:36). Putting a new top layer over the old leads to the ruin of both.
This is why the majority of Westerners who think they have adopted Hinduism 
or Buddhism have really only created their personal simulations of those religions. 

For they have only changed or rearranged their intellectual furniture; everything 
else remains the same. In fact, under pressure the old ideas emerge as entrenched 

as ever. For example, those who for years have professed belief in karma 
immediately wail: ÒWhy did this happen to me?Ó when something unpleasant 
occurs. After 9/11 a multitude of American book-Hindus began demanding why it 

took place, many of them suggesting far-fetched reasons; but not one of them said 
the k-word.
As Sri Ramakrishna observed, you can teach a parrot to call out: ÒRadha-
Krishna! Radha-Krishna!Ó but when you pull its tail it only squawks. It is a simple 

matter to jump from Western religion to Eastern religion, but to really become a 
Hindu or a Buddhist is a matter of profound transformation, having little to do with 

mere ideas.
Once in a conversation with Swami Maheshananda Giri, one of the leading 
sadhus and yogis of Northern India, I asked him: ÒHave you ever met a Westerner 

who really understood Sanatana Dharma?Ó ÒNo,Ó he answered, Òand neither have I 
met an Indian who understood Western religion and philosophy. For to do so, both 
would have to completely tear down their present ideas and build anew from the 

ground up.Ó Since Swamiji had held the chair of Sanskrit and Indology for many 
years at Harvard, I knew he had a basis for his opinion. There must be a complete 
sweeping away before a new structure can be erected in the mind (buddhi) of the 

prospective seeker. This had been my own experience when like a thunderclap all I 
thought I ÒknewÓ was wiped out in a moment, and real life and understanding 
began for me.
That is what 
I
 have to say: now we should listen to what Krishna tells us about 
freedom from karma, not forgetting that good karma is as binding as bad karma.
110
Right action
Those who constantly follow this teaching of mine, full of faith, not 
opposing it, they are released from the bondage of their actions (3:31).
Karma need not be worked out or worked through. As Krishna says later on: 
ÒHe has consumed his karma in the Þre of knowledgeÓ (4:19).
This is one of the most important verses in the Gita, for it tells us how to attain 
moksha (liberation) in the simplest possible way. (I said, simple; not easy.) There 
are some words that deserve contemplation. 
Shraddhavanto
 means ÒbelievingÓ and 
Òfull of faith.Ó 
Anasuyantas
 means quite a few things: Ònot sneering,Ó Ònot spiteful 
[in the sense of being annoyed at having been told the truth],Ó Ònot caviling,Ó Ònot 

grumbling [complaining],Ó and Ònot speaking ill of [what has been taught].Ó In 
short: Òwhiners never win.Ó
If the Gita is diligently studied daily by the serious sadhaka and followed with 
faith and without any reservation or compromise whatsoever, he will be Òreleased 

from the bondage of actions.Ó A knowledge of the Gita and a living out of its 
precepts are a guarantee of liberation. Nothing more is needed. It may seem too 

simple, but why not try it out?
On the other handÉ
But those opposing and not practicing my teaching, confusing all 
knowledge, know them to be lost and mindless (3:32).
There is not much need to comment on this verse. Those who in their ignorance 
disregard or even despise the principles set forth in the Gita are hopeless. 
Everything they think they know is an illusion. Life itself proves the truth of this. 
When I hear someone say: ÒI have never been impressed with or interested in 

Indian philosophy or religion,Ó there is no need for me to mentally cross them o
"
 
the list: they are not even there.
111
ÒNatureÓ
Two ÒnaturesÓ
There are two Sanskrit words that can be translated as Ònature,Ó though both 
have primary meanings beyond that.
The Þrst is prakriti. Prakriti usually means causal matter or the fundamental 
power (shakti) of God from which the entire cosmos is formed. Prakriti is 
undi
"
erentiated matter, the root base of all elements, the material cause of the 
world. It is also known as Pradhana.
Prakriti can be translated ÒnatureÓ when the fundamental energy (shakti) of an 
object is being spoken of. It is not a perfect simile, but a stone sculpture can give us 

some idea. If it is a sculpture of a horse it can be referred to as either horse or 

stone. If we had many sculptures of varying subjects, ÒstoneÓ would be applied to 
all of them when speaking of their fundamental nature.
The other word sometimes translated ÒnatureÓ is bhava. Bhava is the subjective 
state of beingÐattitude of mind, or mental feeling. Although rendered Ònature,Ó 

bhava is a state of prakriti, the way ÒcarvedÓ would be applied to our theoretical 
stone horse. This is in contrast to prakriti being used for nature; for in that instance 

it is the character, the quality of something that is being indicatedÐstone, for 
example.
Let us stay with our horse sculpture simile to clinch the idea. Suppose we have 
identical horse sculptures, but some are wood, some are clay, and some are stone. 

Sculpted, soft, hard, smooth, or rough would be the Òbhava.Ó Wood, clay, and stone 
would be the Òprakriti.Ó One is the shape of something and the other is its 

substance.
The Gita speaks
There are many impossible things in this world. One is that it is impossible to 
Þnd an irrelevant statement in the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita. In this small 
book Vyasa has said virtually everything we need to know regarding spiritual 

philosophy and spiritual practice. It would be pointless to attempt rating the level 
of importance of each verse, but surely one of the most informative is this:
One acts according to oneÕs own prakritiÐeven the wise man does so. 
Beings follow their own prakriti; what will restraint accomplish? (3:33)
Prakriti is vibratory energy. Krishna tells us that all living beings act according to 
their prakriti. For example, under intense pressure a wheel made of rubber will 
bend, one made of wood or plastic will break, and one made of iron or steel will 
hold its shape and endure. The shape may be the same, but the substance makes 
the di
"
erence.
The prakriti of each one of usÐespecially the energy of our mindsÐdetermines 
how we act, think, and speak. It is possible to temporarily suppress the natural 
112
movements of our prakriti, but in time we will revert to our fundamental modes of 
behavior. Sri Ramakrishna illustrated this fact, saying: ÒAt Kamarpukur mongooses 
live in holes up in the wall. When a mongoose stays up there, it is very comfortable. 
Some people tie a brick to its tail, so it is forced out of the hole by its pull. It is 

forced out of its hole by the pull of the brick as many times as it tries to go inside to 
stay in comfort there.Ó
The mongoose is the individual and the brick is the prakriti. The brick has been 
tied to the mongooseÕs tail, and our prakriti has been attached to our Atma-Self. It 

is inescapable. We must deal with itÐnot by merely controlling or repressing it 
(though sometimes this must be done), but by transmuting it into a higher form.
KrishnaÕs statement is not fatalistic, but optimistic, for we can change the 
present state of our prakriti, especially through continual japa and meditation. We 

canÐand mustÐchange the prakriti-lead into prakriti-gold. This is possible through 

yoga. Ethics and religious orientation can certainly assist the process, as can 
external puriÞcation and right behavior, but they can only produce a favorable 
condition for the necessary transmutation.
Restraint
When Krishna asks: ÒWhat will restraint accomplish?Ó he is not subscribing to 
the prevalent Western attitude that suppression or repression are harmful to the 
individual. Rather, he is telling us that mere behavior modiÞcation is valueless 
because in time reversion to negative or foolish activity will occur. If the prakriti is 

not changed the behavior will not be permanently changed.
More than behavior
Prakriti determines our psychological state, and that is the source of our thought 
and action. The way a person thinks and speaks is a matter of prakriti, as is his view 
of himself, others, and life itself. This is why we cannot reason or cajole a person 

into thinking di
"
erently than he presently does. Externally-produced conversion is 
actually impossible, though a person may discover ideas that vibrate in consonance 
with his prakriti and intellectually adopt them. This is particularly true in religion. 

Religion shapes no oneÕs mindÐit is the other way around. Religion does not make 
people bigoted or hateful. Instead, bigoted and hateful people create or gravitate to 
bigoted and hateful religion. Cultish people join cults. Idiots join idiotic movements 

and ideologies. As the prophet said: ÒEphraim is joined to idols: let him 
aloneÓ (Hosea 4:17). And Jesus: ÒLet them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. 
And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditchÓ (Matthew 15:14). 

There is nothing 
we
 can do; 
they
 must do it.
Our part
All right, what should we do with ourselves? Krishna is not counseling doing 
nothing until our yoga sadhana transforms us. Instead, he says: 
Attraction and aversion are inherent in the contact of the senses with 
113
sense-objects. One should not come under the power of these twoÐthey are 
indeed his enemies (3:34).
This verse is about bhava, and it tells us what to do: resist it when it is negative 
or foolish. Realize that it prevents our ascent in consciousness. The word translated 

ÒenemiesÓ can also legitimately be translated as Òhindrances,Ó or Òopponents.Ó
The shifting movements of body, emotion, and intellect are natural, because they 
are manifestations of the present character (quality) of our prakriti. Krishna 

prescribes none of the positive-prettythink strategies so beloved in the West. He 
has only one counsel: Hold on! Do not give way. Resist. And in the meantime Þll 
every waking moment with higher consciousness. This is why he says: ÒMake a 

habit of practicing meditation, and do not let your mind be distracted. In this way 
you will come Þnally to the Lord, who is the light-giver, the highest of the 
highÓ (8:8. Prabhavananda).
Krishna speaks of the Òattraction and aversion [which] are inherent in the 
contact of the senses with sense-objectsÓ to let us understand that the attraction 

and aversion is purely materialÐprakriti basedÐand has nothing to do with us in the 

truest, the atmic, sense. Feelings do not come from the intelligence or the inner 
consciousness. They are a mayic delusion. Here again we see why we must change 
our prakriti.
The spiritual alchemy of yoga is the answer. It always is.
114
Swadharma
Better is oneÕs swadharma, though deÞcient, than the swadharma of 
another well performed. Better is death in oneÕs own swadharma. The 
swadharma of another brings danger (3:35).
Relative existenceÐand we who Þnd ourselves evolving within itÐis dual in 
nature, comprised of Consciousness and Energy. Krishna has just explained to us 

that our actions must match our energy-nature, our prakriti. When they do, that is 
our swadharma, our self-dharma. Now he says that our actions, including our 

livelihood, must be consistent with our state of consciousness, our swabhava, our 
self-nature. Our swabhava is our inherent psychic disposition, our psychological 
nature. It is not just the ebb and ßow of our mental and emotional tides on the 

surface of the mind, but its bedrock condition that prevails throughout any 
momentary ßuctuations.
That mode of external life which is consistent with our swabhava is our 
swadharma, the mode of life and duty that is natural to us, being based on our 

karma and samskara. Our swadharma is consistent with our natural current of 
evolution. Swabhava and swadharma are the natural consequences of our present 

evolutionary status. They both match our prakriti. Just as external restraint is 
worthless, so action not according to swadharma is wasted action and hinders our 
progress, sometimes even harming us.
This is no small thing. How do we determine our swadharma? Not by letting 
others tell us what it is, or letting society impose it on us. (This is the great evil of 

the degenerate Òcaste systemÓ of India which is far from KrishnaÕs meaning when 

he speaks of caste.) The only way to intelligently perceive our swadharma is to 
engage in swadhyaya, self-analysis, as recommended by Patanjali in the Yoga Sutras, 
thus underlining the fact that yoga is inseparable from an ordered and meaningful 

life.
This self-analysis is both intellectual and intuitive, and our intellect and 
intuition must be developed through meditation if our endeavor is to succeed. We 

must discover and live out our swabhava through our swadharma. This is the only 
way to peace and harmony within ourself.
115
In the Grip of the Monster
Why?
I think that one of the saddest things I have seen in life is a little child who has 
done something wrong or silly being confronted by a parent. The dialogue is always 
this:
ÒWhy did you do that?Ó
ÒI donÕt know.Ó
It is sad when the child says ÒI donÕt knowÓ in hope that the parental anger will 
be deßected or defused. But it is much sadder when the child is speaking the truthÐ
he really has no idea why he did what he did. There was an impulse, and he 
followed it. And now look at the consequence.
We pride ourselves on being adults, but no matter how much we have learned 
about the world and life, what do we really know about ourselves? What, especially, 

do we know about the ÒwhyÓ of our actions? When something happens to us we 

glibly say it is karma, but why do we do the things that create our karma? Speaking 
for us, Arjuna puts the question to Krishna, the embodiment of InÞnite 
Consciousness:
Arjuna said: Then by what is a man impelled to commit evil, against his 
own will, as if urged by some force? (3:36).
The word translated ÒevilÓ is 
papa
, which means any kind of negative action, one 
which accrues negative karma or demerit. A secondary meaning is misfortune or 
harmÐthe results of papa, just as karma is both action and reaction.
Arjuna was a great yogi. According to the Mahabharata he lived without needing 
to sleepÐa condition far more psychological than physiologicalÐand could easily pass 

at will from this world into any higher world he might wish to visit. The bonds of 
body and mind rested very lightly upon him. But in the Gita he is questioning 

Krishna on behalf of all humanity, so he sometimes asks things to which he already 
knows the answer. (And we must not forget that Vyasa wrote the Bhagavad Gita as 
a universal instructor for humanity and adjusted it accordingly. I hope nobody 

thinks that Arjuna and Krishna spoke to each other on the battleÞeld in blank 
verse.)
ArjunaÕs question here assumes that action can take place without our conscious 
will being involved, as though there is another kind of impulse that pushes us into 

evil deeds. Those who are self-aware to any signiÞcant degree know that such 
impulses come from inside us, not from outside. ÒThe devil made me do itÓ is one 

of the most shameless evasions of responsibility of which the human being is 
capable. Too bad it happens to be ingrained in Western religion, and no wonder we 
have a sociopathic society. All such impulses come from us alone, and are our 

choices, our mental habits, on some deep subconscious level. The problem is, we 
have many ÒmindsÓ and many Òwills,Ó as we are presently mostly a conglomeration 
116
of fragments. The phenomenon of multiple personality disorder demonstrates that. 
Buddha spoke of us as being a collection of skandhasÐliterally Òheaps.Ó
Know the enemy
Krishna goes directly to the root of the whole matter:
The Holy Lord said: This force is desire and anger born of the rajo-guna, 
the great consumer and of great evil. Know this to be the enemy (3:37).
Rajas means activity, passion, or desire for an object or goal. The quality of rajas 
is the rajoguna, which impels us to those things. This raging Þre has two major 
ßames: kama and krodha, desire and anger. However, it is the rajoguna itself that is 

Òthe enemy.Ó And what an enemy! Krishna calls it 
mahashano
, Òmighty eaterÓ or 
Òmighty consumer,Ó and 
mahapapma
, which means Ògreat evil,Ó Ògreat misfortune,Ó 
Ògreat sin,Ó Ògreat harm(er),Ó and Ògreat(ly) injurious.Ó It must be reckoned with. 

But right now our attention has been drawn to desire and anger.
Although we know academically that desire includes lust, in both English and 
American usage it has such a strong sexual connotation that it overshadows the 

simple word ÒdesireÓ when we encounter it in the Gita. Kama is desire in any 
degree or form. Fundamentally, kama is desire for any object, whether it is solely 
mental or produces an overt act or speech. Even simple wishes are pastel shades of 

kama. So simple ÒdesireÓ is still the best translation. Krodha is anger in any degree, 
including wrath and fury. Hatred is essentially krodha.
It is necessary for us to understand that desire and anger in even the slightest 
degree is still a problem, an obstacle to real peace. Simple attraction (raga) and 

aversion (dwesha) are not passions, but they, too, must eventually be expunged 
from the yogiÕs heart. How much more, then, must kama and krodha be seen as the 

dangerous forces they actually are, Òthe great consumer and of great evil.Ó They 
prey on us unmercifully, ravaging us on all levels of our being. That is why Socrates, 
later in life, spoke of the fading of lust as Òfreedom from a harsh and cruel master.Ó 

Of all sins, desire and anger are the most lethal.
We must be vigilant and sensitive to the presence of these two assassins of the 
soul. Desire and anger take many forms. They arise in us wearing an array of 

masksÐmany of them seeming righteous and even holyÐbut we must ruthlessly strip 
them away and expose their real character. Otherwise these snipers of the heart will 
destroy us. There can be no truce with them. They are implacable enemies, and we 

should be as implacably inimical to them. No quarter should be given or any 
prisoners taken. As Krishna will soon tell us in verse forty-one, we must Òkill this 
evil being, which destroys ordinary knowledge and supreme knowledge.Ó
The Òworks of the devilÓ
It is not so hard to detect the evil of anger and hatred. Their destructive nature 
is readily seen. Anger and hatred, even when willfully indulged, are essentially 
painful to us. But desire (kama) promises us pleasure, a wheedling false friend that 
leads us into su
"
ering, but which Þrst drugs us and makes us think we are enjoying 
117
ourselves. It is a terrible trap which few escape. For anger can burn us out, but 
desire is an addiction augmented by its every indulgence. KrishnaÕs exposition will 
cover it thoroughly.
As Þre is enveloped by smoke, as mirrors are covered by dust, as wombs 
cover embryos, in the same way knowledge is covered by this, the constant 

enemy of the wise, having the form of desire which is like insatiable Þre 
(3:38-39).
As long as you feed it, the Þre keeps burning. And it will burn anything it 
touches, as well. Desire cannot be fulÞlled any more than a Þre can be put out by 

adding fuel to it. It is true that if we dump a huge amount of solid fuel on a Þre it 

may become invisible to us, but it is down there working, and will eventually blaze 
up even stronger. It must be extinguished fully.
Desire is a fundamental denial of our nature which is satchidananda: existence, 
consciousness and bliss. It makes us feel we need some pleasure or power, object or 

state, that such things will somehow make us more than we presently are and will 
make us happy. In this way desire is the prime force of the not-self. There is no way 

our true nature can be altered, diminished, or destroyed, but desire certainly alters, 
diminishes, and destroys our perception of reality, burying our Self beneath its 
insubstantial debris that is really nothing. It makes us like fools Þshing in a pond 

for the moon. This is because:
The senses, mind, and intellect are said to be its abode. With these it 
deludes the embodied one by veiling his innate wisdom (3:40).
Desire grips us in compulsions that end in terrible su
"
ering. It is indeed Òthe 
constant enemy of the wise,Ó for its enmity is without cessation or mitigation and is 

all-embracing.
The Þre of desire is, according to this verse, inherent in the senses, mind, and 
intellect. And when it blazes up in them its smoke obscures and even conceals the 

Self. In ancient India it was considered that Þre was inherent in whatever was 

ßammable, that it was evoked by friction or external heat, but it was always there in 
potential form. And when Þre Òwent outÓ it really just withdrew to some subtler, 
inner level of existence.
So when Buddha used the simile of Þre for the Self of a person, he did not mean 
that it became ÒextinguishedÓ or annihilated, but that it simply passed into another 

level of being, that objects and desires were the fuel that kept it trapped here for a 

while. Once they were gone, the Þre-Self was liberated. And that was Nirvana.
The cure
Therefore, controlling the senses at the outset, kill this evil being, which 
destroys ordinary knowledge and supreme knowledge (3:41).
We can rid ourselves of this awful addiction, this horrible hallucination that is 
desire. It is not easy, but it must be done.
The Þrst step is control of the senses. This is impossible without the observance 
of yama and niyama, the ten commandments of yoga:
118
1) Ahimsa: non-violence, non-injury, harmlessness
2) Satya: truthfulness, honesty
3) Asteya: non-stealing, honesty, non-misappropriativeness
4) Brahmacharya: sexual continence in thought, word and deed as well as 
control of all the senses
5) Aparigraha: non-possessiveness, non-greed, non-selÞshness, non-
acquisitiveness
6) Shaucha: purity, cleanliness
7) Santosha: contentment, peacefulness
8) Tapas: austerity, practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline

9) Swadhyaya: introspective self-study, spiritual study
10) Ishwarapranidhana: o
"
ering of oneÕs life to God
(For explanations of all these, see 
The Foundations of Yoga
.)
The two absolutes for success in sense control are a vegetarian diet and 
meditation. But Krishna has more to tell us regarding this.
They say that the senses are superior to the body, the mind is superior to 
the senses, the intellect is superior to the mind. And much superior to the 
intellect is the supreme intelligence. Having learned this, sustaining the lower 
Self by the higher Self, kill this di
!
cult-to-encounter enemy which has the 

form of desire. (3:42-43)
This is why meditation is necessary. Only through the practice of yoga can we 
ascend the ladder of senses, mind, and will to reach the Self, the only source of 

mastery and freedom. At the same time we have to use our good sense, so Krishna 
tells us that we must Òkill this evil being, which destroys ordinary knowledge and 
supreme knowledge.Ó For it is really the ego who is masquerading in the form of 

desire so it can persuade us that it is really us who are the source of its impulses. It 
wants to blame us and even make us feel guiltyÐanother delusion. Instead we must 
see it for what it is, cast o
"
 our non-existent weakness, and confront it with the 

truth of our almighty Self.
We are not to simply overpower desire, or banish it, or merely weaken it, or 
come to some kind of peace agreement with it. For it is Òthe constant enemy of the 

wiseÓ and will eventually return to the attack with increased strength. It must be 
killed out by the very roots. And we must do it by the power revealed within us by 
yoga sadhana.
ÒAlways disciplining himself thus, the yogi whose mind is subdued goes to the 
supreme peace of nirvana, and attains to union with me.É Therefore be a 

yogiÓ (6:15, 46).
119
ÒDevotee and FriendÓ
The ÒgenealogyÓ of yoga
After outlining the basic way of yoga, Krishna then tells Arjuna:
The Holy Lord said: This eternal yoga I taught to Vivaswat, Vivaswat 
taught it to Manu, and Manu taught it to Ikshwaku. Thus, handed down in 
succession, the royal seers knew it. After a long lapse of time, this yoga was 
lost here on earth (4:1-2).
Vivasvat, Manu, and Ikshvaku were ancient sagesÐprimeval sages, actually, at the 
beginning of the human race. God himself directly taught yoga to those sages. That 

is why Patanjali says in the Yoga Sutras: ÒHe is Guru even of the AncientsÓ (Yoga 
Sutras 1:26).
Just how the yoga was forgotten (lost) is not told to us, but it is important that 
we realize that this world, whose nature is bondage, is not a friendly environment 

for that which liberates. Whether the yoga was lost by carelessness or defects or 

omissions in teaching, or whether a time came when no one was even interested, 
the result was loss of the knowledge.
The same is true of our personal world. The mind is extremely gifted in 
forgetting or distorting the correct practice of yoga. Therefore we should be very 

vigilant and make sure that our practice is exactly correct, with not a single detail 
being neglected or left out. There are several contemporary spiritual organizations 

that over the course of years have so altered the yoga methods they teach that they 
have been rendered ine
"
ectualÐand in some cases, detrimental.
How do we protect ourself from this spiritual erosion? Study the Gita. It is all 
there. If we read the Gita, the eleven authentic Upanishads, and the Yoga Sutras of 

Patanjali without prejudice or preconception we will Þnd they are unanimous in 
their teaching on meditation.
Who is Krishna in the Gita?
We have already Þnished three chapters of the Gita, and it is time for us to 
understand who the Þgure of Krishna really isÐand what the Gita really is, as well.
First we must understand the context of the Gita. The Gita is seven hundred 
verses within an epic poem known as The Mahabharata, that chronicles the 
Mahabharata (Great Indian) War that took place about three thousand years ago 
(according to the calculations of Swami Sri Yukteswar Giri). The original poem was 
written by the great sage Vyasa, perhaps the single most important Þgure in Indian 

spiritual history.
The Bhagavad Gita is the supreme scripture of India, for it is the essence of all 
the basic texts that came before it. Further, it supplies a psychological side to 

spiritual practice that can be found in no other authoritative text. If someone 
desires, he can conÞne his study to the Gita alone and yet know everything that is 
120
in those texts. Although it contains some references to elements distinctly Indian, it 
is the only universal scripture, its teachings (including those about caste) being 
relevant to the entire human race.
Having said that, we must realize that although the Gita takes the form of a 
conversation between Krishna and Arjuna on the eve of the Great Indian War, it is 

not a historical document in the literal sense. Rather, Vyasa chose this critical 
juncture in Indian history as the setting for a complete exposition of spiritual lifeÐ

itself a battle of sorts. It cannot reasonably be thought that Krishna and Arjuna sat 
in a chariot in the midst of a battleÞeld discussing all the topics presented in the 
Gita, and in metrical stanzas of four lines containing eight syllables each 

(sometimes eleven syllables when Vyasa needed the extra length to get in all his 
ideas). Rather, the Gita is VyasaÕs presentation of the Eternal Dharma, though there 
is no reason to doubt that the wisdom of Krishna is embodied in it, or that much of 

itÐat least in generalÐwas spoken to Arjuna at Kurukshetra.
One of IndiaÕs greatest yogis in the twentieth century was Paramhansa 
Nityananda of Ganeshpuri. One day someone cited a portion of the Gita, prefacing 

it with the statement: ÒKrishna said in the GitaÉ.Ó Immediately Nityananda said: 
ÒNo. Vyasa 
said
 Krishna saidÉ.Ó This is the correct perspective on the entire Gita. 
What we are reading is the enlightened understanding of Vyasa, who in the Gita is 
presenting us with a digest of the yoga philosophy of the Upanishads combined 
with both yoga psychology and instruction in yoga meditation. It is not amiss to say 
that Vyasa is the most important Þgure in Sanatana Dharma. If all other scriptures 

and commentaries disappeared and only the Gita remained, the Dharma would still 
be intact.
In general, then, Krishna is the voice of Vyasa, but within the Gita he is at times 
the voice of both the Atman and the Paramatman. So when we ponder the meaning 

of his words we should consider how they might be understood in this dual 
manner. For example, when Krishna tells us to Þx our minds on him and worship 

him single-heartedly and steadfastly, he is not telling us to worship a God that is 
outside, but that which is the inmost dweller of the heart. He also means that the 
focus of our attention must be on our individual being as well as on the inÞnite. For 

they are one in essence.
The qualiÞed student
During my Þrst trip to India I met two Westerners who told me they had come 
to India to seek out a ÒqualiÞed guru.Ó I laughed and with my usual lack of tact 
asked: ÒAre you qualiÞed disciples? Do you think a qualiÞed guru would accept 

you?Ó They looked very taken aback and then admitted that it was not likely. But 
when I met them some months later they told me they had gotten initiation from 
every guru they met. ÒJust to make sure,Ó was their explanation. They had not 

gotten the idea.
But who is a qualiÞed disciple? Krishna tells Arjuna:

This ancient yoga is today declared by me to you because you are my 
121
devotee and friend. This secret is supreme indeed (4:3).
Devotee and friend. Here we have the marvelous, seeming contradiction that is 
the jewel of Eastern religion (including Eastern Christianity): the ability to be 
simultaneously absolutely reverent toward and yet absolutely familiar with and at 

home with God. The fear and trepidation, so beloved to Western religion past and 
present, simply do not come into it. Why? Because the orientals intuit their unity 
with God, while the occidentals feel utterly separated and alien from God. 

Consequently Western religion demands reconciliation and placation while Eastern 
religion simply calls us to unity, a unity that is essential and eternal. Westerners 
doubt their salvation, but Easterners know that they may have forgotten their unity 

with the Divine, but they have never lost it. They do not Þnd salvation, they recover 
it. The inÞnity of God and their Þnitude does not daunt them in the least. They 
rejoice in both as devotees and friends of God. Because only such people can know 

this, Krishna says it is a secretÐthe Supreme Secret indeed.
122
The Eternal Being
Having been told that Krishna had taught Yoga to the most ancient of human 
beings:
Arjuna said: Your birth was later, and VivaswatÕs birth was earlier. How 
then should I understand that you taught this in the beginning? (4:4)
Krishna replies most directly and simply:
The Holy Lord said: Many of my births have passed away, and also yours. I 
know them all; you do not know them (4:5).
Buddha taught that remembrance of all our past lives occurs at the time of 
enlightenment. However, some believe that recall of all previous lives can occur 
even before that. Whichever it might be, the idea is that every moment of our 

previous lives remains embedded in our subtle bodies and can inßuence and even 
determine our present lives.
Coming into ÒbeingÓ
Yet, we are something more than a storyÐwe are Being itself, waves of the ocean 
of InÞnite Being. Krishna, speaking as that Being, begins telling Arjuna of what he 
really is, and the truth of his relation to the world:
Although birthless and imperishable, although the Lord of all beings, 
controlling my own prakriti, I come into manifested being by my own power 

of maya (4:6).
Being completely outside of time, space, and all relativity, God (Brahman) is 
beyond birth and death, and any change whatsoever. The rest of us come and go, 

come and go, but Brahman abides forever; there is no coming or going for him. 
Never must we consider God as being conditioned in any way by relativity. This is 
not easy for us in the West who have lived from birth in an assumption that God 

perpetually reacts to usÐthat it is we who determine the state of God far more than 
he determines our stateÐand that we can control GodÕs Òmoods.Ó We have thought 
that our words, thoughts, and deeds will determine GodÕs relation to us and how he 

thinks of us and cares or does not care about us. This is a tremendous error. 
However choppy the waves may be, the ocean remains stable and constant. It is the 
same with our tiny, tempestuous minds and lives in contrast to the utter 

Changelessness of God.
Yet, he has the most intimate connection/relation with us as our Lord 
(Ishwara), our inmost Self (Antaratman) and Ruler (Antaryamin). How can this 

seeming contradiction be? The illusive power known as Maya. Therefore Krishna 
continues:
Why
Whenever dharma decreases and there is the arising of adharma, then do I 
123
manifest myself. For protection of the righteous and destruction of evildoers, 
for the establishing of dharma, I manifest myself from age to age (4:7-8).
Whenever dharma decreases and anti-dharma rises up, Ishwara manifests 
himself through a liberated master, who is an avatar, an incarnation of divine 

consciousness. Why? 
Paritranaya
 means Òfor giving refuge,Ó Òfor protecting,Ó Òfor 
preservation,Ó and Òfor the deliveranceÓÐall that. And for whom? For the righteousÐ

those that seek the Real, the True: Brahman. Krishna means this in the sense of 

anyone who pursues Brahmajnana, such as the yogis who seek union with 
Brahman. There is an implication here, then, that dharma is essentiallyÐeven 
exclusivelyÐthe seeking for God, the living of the yoga life.
But others are involved here: 
dushkritam
, the doers of evil. His plan for them is 
vinashaya
, Òfor the destruction,Ó of the evildoers. When this is done, dharma is 

reestablished on a solid basis and the righteous can pursue their aims in the right 

way in a harmonious and conducive environment. And this is done 
yuge yuge
Ðfrom 
age to age. Whether Krishna is referring to the concept of ascending and descending 

ages (yugas) as is current now, or whether he just means eras of human history 

cannot be known for sure. The important idea here is that whenever there is a need 
there is a manifestation of the Divine.
Because of the present-day obsession with gods and avatars, it is assumed in 
India that Krishna is speaking of yugavatarsÐavatars of the ageÐthat appear rather 

like the Þgures in mechanical clocks, every hour on the hour. However that may be, 
the idea is that God does something at times of spiritual crisis. It is commonly 

assumed that God is born on earth at those times, but 
sambhavani
 means ÒI come 
into being,Ó or ÒI originate myself.Ó Now there is no place in Sanatana Dharma for 

the idea that God comes into being at a point in time, or somehow creates himself. 

Consequently, ÒI manifestÓ is the safest translation. Although there can be no 
argument against births of perfected beings (siddhas) that are in a very real sense 
incarnations of God Consciousness, divine manifestations can take place in many 

ways to awaken straying humanity. I know of situations where the people of entire 
countries had profound spiritual awakening while the rest of the world snored 
away. Such an event was the Welsh Revival at the beginning of the twentieth 

century. At the end of the nineteenth century, the Ramakrishna Mission, inspired by 
Sri Ramakrishna and Swami Vivekananda, was the impetus for a powerful 
movement whose e
"
ect is felt throughout the world even now. Nearer our time, the 

arising of the Thai Forest Tradition in Thailand was a miraculous, spontaneous 
awakening that is still bearing fruit.
We must not forget that Krishna says this happens through his Maya, not 
through Shakti. So the creative power (prakriti) of God is not the deceiver it is 

always being claimed to be. Maya just means that the whole creation and what takes 
place therein is an illusion, like a motion picture. Only the consciousnesses, the 

spirits, that are witnessing the movie as though they were inside it and part of it, 
are real.
God is ÒbornÓ in his creation, yet he is not born at all. Rather, through his power 
124
of Maya, he ÒdreamsÓ creation and shows those dreams to us, enabling us to enter 
into his dream and dream along with him the dreams that will culminate in our 
awakening into his own Consciousness and Being, nevermore to forget ourselves in 
a dream body in a dream world. We, too, are ever unborn, though dreaming 

innumerable births and deaths.
Why? Because each life we dream is an exercise in consciousness, a means of 
developing (evolving) our scope of consciousness and understanding (jnana). We 

su
"
er because the dreams get out of our control, but once we master our dreaming 
all confusion, doubt, weakness, and ignorance will cease and we will be Òborn 
againÓ into perfect spiritual awareness, into the ultimate liberation for which we 

were destined before we Þrst entered into relative existenceÐor appeared to enter, 
for it was all a series of educational dream-movies in the cosmic school of God 
Consciousness.
I manifest
From age to age, and in every age, we see the advent of divine consciousness in 
the world. Sometimes this takes place in the form of spiritual revelation to puriÞed 
individuals who can perceive the divine revelation and convey it to others. But 
sometimes beings of such high consciousness and power come among us that they 

are truly manifestations of God himself. Whether these Great Ones are direct 
manifestations of God in human form, or are perfect, liberated beings who have 
long ago transcended the human condition and evolved upward unto total unity/

identity with God, really has no relevance to us. What matters is the light they shed 
into our darkness and their teachings which, backed by inÞnite will, are truly Òspirit 
and lifeÓ (John 6:63). Our obligation is not to deÞne these holy messengers, but to 

carefully follow their teachings. ÒWhosoever shall do and teach them, the same 
shall be called great in the kingdom of heavenÓ (Matthew 5:19. See Matthew 7:21; 
Luke 6:46). For they lead unerringly to the kingdom of inÞnite life.
We, too
We also, through our personal prakriti, our own maya, come back in each life to 
purify and evolve ourselves, to reveal that which is holy and innate in us, and to 
dispel the sin and ignorance into which we have strayed, Þnally establishing our 
consciousness in the Consciousness with which it has ever been one. Here, too, it is 

a sleeping and a forgetting until we awaken, remember, and say with the Psalmist: 
ÒWhen I awake, I am still with theeÓ (Psalms 139:18). The dream of separation and 
limitation is over forever. The purpose of life is liberation.
Self-knowing
He who knows in truth my divine birth and action, leaving the body is not 
born again: he comes to me. Free from greed, fear and anger, absorbed in me, 
holding fast to me, puriÞed by knowledge-based tapasya, many have attained 
my state of being (4:9-10).
125
Knowing that the advent or ÒbirthÓ of Divine Light in the worldÐand in our own 
individual consciousnessÐhas our enlightenment as its sole purpose, we can 
intelligently move toward freedom from rebirth. If we live accordingly we shall 
transcend the need for birth in any relative world and live in God fully. Rising above 

all passions rooted in the egoÐand above the ego itselfÐwe stand forth in the purity 
of being that is God.
126
The Path
In whatever way men resort to me do I thus reward them. It is my path 
which men follow everywhere (4:11).
For us raised in the Òlight that is darknessÓ of Western religion, every verse of 
the Gita is a revelation of stunning proportions. Certainly this is one of the most 
revelatory of them allÐit opens vistas that free and expand the heart as we never 
dreamed possible. Let us continually look at them and rejoice in them. For Sanatana 
Dharma is not a dose of medicine or a contract of obligation, it is the key that 

unlocks our shackles, the light that dispels darkness and reveals the wonders of the 
way things are.
In whatever way men resort to me do I thus reward them
. 
Bhajami
 basically means ÒI 
reward,Ó but it can legitimately be translated ÒI share withÓ and ÒI love.Ó In other 

words, however we may approach God, he will respond and fulÞll our spiritual 
needs, loving us as his own being. It is all a matter of the disposition of our inmost 

mind and heart. Many people think they are seeking God, and many more tell 
others that they are seeking, but God truly knows, and respondsÐor notÐ
accordingly. What is so heartening here is that however God is approached, he 

responds. Since we are incapable of meeting him on his own terms, he meets us on 
ours, and enables us to come up to his standards in time. For his motive is love. 
Those religionists whose motive is hate, greed, and ego, say otherwise, but that is 

their problem. While they are trying to beat others into conformity and submission 
to them, GodÕs truth sets their victims free from such tyranny.
If we come seeking spiritual relief and healing, we will receive that. If we come 
seeking understanding, that will be given us. If we come yearning for living contact 

with God, that shall be ours. In other words, God will listen to the inmost 
movements of our hearts and grant any worth seeking. It is the character, the 

quality, of our taking refuge that will determine the outcome. No legitimate seeking 
is fruitless. It is not the form of the seeking, the externalities, that matter, but the 
interior intention and disposition of the heart that evokes the divine response and 

determines its character. Here, too, it is a matter of sowing and reaping.
It is my path which men follow everywhere
. Of course! There is nothing other than 
God, and all relative existence is his manifestation/embodiment. So obviously there 

is no other path but his. Even Shakespeare knew this, saying: ÒThereÕs a divinity 
that shapes our ends, rough-hew them how we will.Ó However much we tangle 
things up and subvert our true nature, however horriÞc the mess of our life may be, 

yet we are walking on the One Path. The problem is, we walk the path in our 
manner, according to our arrogant (and errant) ignorance. Nevertheless, it is his 
path, and the moment we turn toward him, however blindly or uncomprehendingly, 

we will start to walk it in his wayÐa glorious way, for it ends in him. So we can say 
with Horatio, to whom Hamlet addressed the previous quote: ÒThat is most 
127
certain.Ó
This is wonderful to contemplate, so let us not leave it just yet. Every single 
human being is traveling a path that ultimately belongs to God. This is logical, since 
he is the source of all. They may be misusing that path, but it cannot change the 

fact that every thought and act of a human being has its roots in the Divine Being. 
Humans may subvert and trivialize the power of God, but they cannot wrest it from 
him. In time its true nature will be revealed. This is why we read so much of men 

and women who were spiritually awakened and redirected in the midst of their folly 
and wrongdoing. Some have stepped from darkness into light in the very act of evilÐ
which they turned from in gladness. Many have found God present in the depths of 

degradation. That is why the Psalmist wrote: ÒWhither shall I go from thy spirit? or 
whither shall I ßee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I 
make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and 

dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy 
right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night 
shall be light about meÓ (Psalms 139:7-11). This we can know: whatever path 

anyone is now following, however foolish or negative it may seem, it is 
fundamentally GodÕs path. It is the way we walk it that gets us in or out of trouble.
Thinking of this, I recalled a wonderfully peaceful evening when I was going 
down the holy Narmada river in a sailboat to an ashram located on its banks. As the 

boat glided along it came to the large bathing ghat of the town of Chandod. A 
hundred or more people were there, sitting looking over the river, visiting, or 

engaged in various tasks including bathing and laundry. As I watched this tranquil 
spectacle, for some reason the Christian missionaries in India popped into my 
mind. What a di
"
erent reaction they would have! To my mind I was viewing blessed 

souls making their way toward the Divine Goal, souls whose ultimate destiny was 
assured. But the missionaries would see lost and darkened souls destined to be 
dragged o
"
 to eternal hell unless they (the missionaries) proclaimed the Gospel and 

persuaded them to Òaccept the Lord Jesus ChristÓÐsomeone they already believed in 
as a Son of God in a manner far more realistic than the erroneous theology of the 
missionaries. Because of this di
"
erence in viewpoints I was living in heaven; but 

they would be in hellÐalready.
Wherever a human being walks, however tangled the path or how dark the 
surroundings, eventually it will emerge in the light and they will know themselves 

as children of the Light. This is a marvelous truth. It also points out that all 
spiritual seeking, whatever its ßaws may be, will lead in time to God. Yes, even the 
anxious and miserable missionaries will Þnd in time that their sincere endeavors 

have produced positive karma for them that will enable them to move from 
ignorance to wisdom. Then they, too, will know the truth expressed here in the 
Gita.
A ÒfootnoteÓ
Of course, not all seeking is spiritual seeking. Therefore Krishna makes this 
128
comment:
Longing for success in action, in this world men sacriÞce to the gods 
because success from such action is quickly attained in the human world 
(4:12).
Whether many gods, or the One God, are worshipped by people, their worship is 
usually not God-oriented, but centered in this world and their material aims. 

However, those aims are obtained by them, because no attention given to God is in 

vain. Moreover, faith is produced in them by their answered prayers so that when 
they do come to seek God for the right reasons their faith will strengthen and 
motivate them.
The sum and substance is this: Worship God, worship God, worship GodÉ and 
Þnd God. It is assured.
129
Caste and Karma
Karma
ActionÐkarmaÐis the basis of our continuing existence within the realm of 
relativity, even though our essential nature, the Self (Atman), transcends all relative 
modes of being. In other words, it is action that binds us. Fortunately, action can 

also free us, so Krishna is explaining to us all about action, its nature, purpose, and 
e
"
ects.
The word karma is derived from the Sanskrit root 
kri
, which means to act, do, or 
make. Karma is any kind of action, including thought and feeling. It also means the 

e
"
ects of action. Karma is both action and reaction, the metaphysical equivalent of 
the principle: ÒFor every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.Ó Saint Paul 

expressed it perfectly when he wrote: ÒWhatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reapÓ (Galatians 6:7). It is karma operating through the law of cause and e
"
ect that 
binds the jiva or the individual soul to the wheel of birth and death.
Karma is both the cause and the e
"
ect of our evolution and of our duty 
(swadharma), which includes caste in its metaphysical sense.
Caste ÒismÓ and caste ÒsystemÓ
Before looking at the next verse which is about caste, we should consider what 
Krishna is not at all speaking about, even though for centuriesÐif not millenniaÐit is 
assumed in India that he is.
First, he is not at all speaking of a rigid, imposed system of social stratiÞcation 
where people are assigned a place in society simply because their parents occupied 

that place. In actuality, birth is not a determining factor in caste, although it can 
sometimes reßect it. Second, he is not speaking of valuing a person according to his 
imposed caste position or birth. Caste ÒismÓ and the caste ÒsystemÓ have no place 

in KrishnaÕs teaching, but are a corruption of caste based on ignorance, oppression, 
and egotism. The early scriptures of Hinduism bear this out, speaking of peopleÕs 
caste being determined by their character, and even telling of those who moved 

from one caste to another in a single life because of their personal development. For 
example, the philosopher-king Janaka, a kshatriya, in time was recognized as a 
brahmin.
Caste
Although he will be expounding the subject of caste and caste-duty in the Þnal 
chapter of the Gita, Krishna brießy introduces it, saying:
The fourfold caste was created by me, based on guna and on karma 
(4:13a).
The word translated ÒcasteÓ is 
varna
Ðcolor. Krishna says: 
Chaturvarnyam maya 
srishtam
ÐÒThe four castes [colors] were created [brought forth] by me.Ó Krishna is 
130
saying that the Supreme Spirit has brought forth into manifestation human beings 
of a fourfold kind. And this Supreme Lord has not ÒcreatedÓ human beings as four 
types, but has manifested them 
guna karma vibhagashah
ÐÒaccording to the sharing of 
their guna and karma.Ó That is, all human beings fall into four very broad categories 
according to the evolutionary level of their development: according to the quality 
(guna) of the energies of which their subtle and gross bodies are formed, and 
according to the karmas which they have been born to fulÞll. The ÒcolorÓ of each 

caste is either symbolic or a matter of the dominant color that can be clairvoyantly 
perceived in their aura. In either case, our caste is determined solely by the innate 
vibratory qualities present within us. No one assigns us a caste, though others may 

be able to perceive it, perhaps better than we do.
It is essential to grasp the fundamental fact that caste has absolutely nothing to 
do with a personÕs livelihood, though caste will certainly inßuence what we will 

gravitate to as our profession. Consequently, the general and natural situation was 
for shudras to be the servant classÐthose who assisted the three other castes in 
their respective functions; vaishyas to be the artisan/merchant class (which 

included agriculture); kshatriyas to be the warrior/ruling class (which included law 
enforcement); and brahmins to be the teaching/priestly class (this included the 
making of laws and magisterial duties).
All castes had their function that was essential to society. All were respected for 
their skills and for the beneÞts they provided for all in common. It is extremely 

necessary for us to see that the shudras were not half slaves at the bottom of society 

in mere servitude. Certainly some were in domestic service, but manyÐif not mostÐ
were found at the side of the other classes to help them in their work.
The idea of outcastes who would be relegated to the work everyone else was 
considered too superior to do, was absolutely unknown. The only ÒoutcastesÓ 

practically speaking were criminals doing voluntary penance outside the context of 
normal society, and they would be reinstated once their penance had been 

completed. The outcastes of today are the descendants of incorrigibles who refused 
to observe the penances (not punishments) imposed on them by the brahmin 
judges and instead took to a wild and wandering life that often included crime.
In modern times certain very traditional institutions such as the Arya Samaj 
provide the means for these people to be reinstated into normal Hindu society if 

they desire. (Most do notÐso it is their choice to remain in degradation.) In the last 

century Pandit Anandapriya of the Arya Samaj enabled over half a million of these 
and other estranged groups to return to traditional Hinduism. Vishwanath 
Brahmachari of Bombay (Galgoan) also returned many Òno-castesÓ to Hinduism by 

giving them a caste status based on guna and karma. Like the Arya Samaj, he also 
enabled many non-Indians to also adopt Sanatana Dharma in the fullest traditional 
manner, assigning them a caste, as well.
Color (varna)
So what are the ÒcolorsÓ of the four castes? There may be more than one answer 
131
to this, however in the dharma (or grihya) sutras, ancient texts dealing with the 
gurukula, the place where Indians were originally educated, we Þnd colors assigned 
to the clothing of the four castes. (Notice that all four castes were going to attend 
the school, not just some ÒhigherÓ castes.) White was the color of shudras; yellow 

the color of vaishyas; red the color of kshatriyas, and orange the color of brahmins.
White is actually not a color, but all colors combined. This would be appropriate 
for shudras, since they were involved in the duties of all the castes. It also expresses 

their social ßuidity, for originally the shudras were the most frequently transferred 
into other castes.
Yellow is the auric color of intelligence and initiativeÐan essential trait for 
agriculturalists, artisans, merchants, and those that comprise the vaishya caste.
Red is the color of dynamic power, discipline and assertiveness, so it naturally 
Þts the kshatriyas.
Orange (gerua) is a combination of yellow and red, for brahmins must have the 
mental acumen and vigorous personal energies of the vaishyas and kshatriyas 
combined with a dominant spiritual consciousness. Fire is the essence of the 

original sacred rites of India, so its orange color represents spiritual consciousness 
and its transmuting powers.
It is interesting that all four colors are to be found in levels of the Indian 
monastic life. The standard color of full sannyas is appropriately orange, for it is the 

color of the crematory Þre in which the earthly body is consumed, and the 
sannyasiÕs aim is to reduce to ashes all that is earthly within himself by means of 

the Þre of spiritual realization.
The gurukula
In primeval Indian society, the male children were sent at an early age to live in a 
gurukula, the home of a teacher, until reaching adulthood. The vastly 
comprehensive education in a gurukula could last from Þfteen to twenty years. At 

the end of his education, the young man returned to his parents, was married, and 
established his own household. By that time it was necessary that his caste be 
known so he could fulÞll his caste duties. The gurukula was the place where his 

caste was determined by careful observation on the part of one or more teachers. 
Only after careful analysis of his personality was his caste determined.
Although there are many progressive educational institutions in India that are 
based on a spiritual viewpoint, it was only in the schools of Swami (later 

Paramhansa) Yogananda Giri that the ancient gurukula system was revived in its 
fullness. Yogananda drew up a Psychological Chart for the use of the teachers in his 

schools. Through the years each student was observed by those teachers and was 
Þnally classiÞed according to his guna and karma, just as it had been done 
thousands of years before. This was something absolutely extraordinary and 

revolutionary, and even today is hardly recognized for what it is (was). If he had not 
come to America, who can say what modern Hinduism might have become through 
YoganandaÕs inßuence.
132
Personal meaning
For us living in the West in the twenty-Þrst century, caste has meaning for us 
since knowing the character of our guna and karma is part of the knowledge that 
can lead to Self-knowledge. Although it may be a purely personal matter, it is good 

for us to know what our caste is, and live our lives accordingly.
In reality, each one of us is a kingdom, a ÒnationÓ to ourselves, and all four 
castes can be found within our psychological makeup. There are times when we 

must be shudras, others when we must be vaishyas, and so on. When there is 
Òcaste mixtureÓÐthat is, when in one aspect of our life we live according to a 
manner inappropriate to itÐgreat harm can result. For example, in religion we must 

not be vaishyas, turning it into a business, nor must we be kshatriyas, trying to use 
it to coerce others to accept our spiritual ideas. Instead we must be brahminsÐ
simple and self-contained, oriented only toward our spiritual development, making 

our religion truly a matter of consciousness, free from materiality. On the other 
hand, in practical (including economic) matters we must not be materially 
indi
"
erent brahmins or aggressive kshatriyas, but worthy vaishyas. When 
considering principles of personal conduct or dealing with negativity, we must be 
valiant kshatriyas, giving no thought to economic gain or loss, or conciliatory 
compromises.
The subject of caste merits our attention and application as sadhakas. For caste 
duty is more than social, it is the way to hasten and facilitate our endeavors in 

personal evolution.
133
ActionÐDivine and Human
Krishna, having referred to caste as the basis of intelligent human action, now 
begins to speak of divine actionÐthat of both the individual and the cosmic Self:
Though I am the creator thereof, know me to be the eternal non-doer 
(4:13b).
The transcendent and the immanent
Both the Paramatman and the jivatman share the qualities of being 
simultaneously transcendent and immanent. This is a major insight, without which 
their seemingly contradictory manifestations and perceptions produce only 
confusion and contradiction. Religions throughout the ages have been torn by 

arguments about views considered contradictory that are in reality facets of a single 
truth. Even in India conßict is found regarding whether or not God has form or is 
formless, has qualities or is devoid of qualities, is personal or impersonal, is 

deÞnable or indeÞnable, when God (Brahman) is all of these. But only those whose 
inner consciousness is opened can begin to comprehend this.
How is God beyond action? Since all things proceed from him, including their 
movement and change, can we really say he does not act? Even if his sole act is the 

emanation of the universe, that is no small deed. Evidently he is the non-doer in 
that no action can a
"
ect him in any degree or produce any kind of conditioning in 

him. Krishna now expounds on this.
Actions do not taint me
Actions do not taint me, nor is desire for actionÕs fruit in me. He who thus 
comprehends me is not bound by actions (4:14).
Patanjali tells us in the Yoga Sutras: ÒIshwara [God] is a particular Purusha 
[Spirit, Person] Who is untouched by the a
#
ictions of life, actions, and the results 
and impressions produced by these actionsÓ (Yoga Sutras 1:24). The key point here 
is that God is untouchedÐfree fromÐany compulsion to act or the result of actions, 

both of which condition the Þnite individual. The laws of causation apply only to 
those intelligences who are moving within the plane of relative existence. It is 
necessary for them to be ÒtouchedÓ by action, otherwise they would not evolve 

beyond relativity. But this is never the case with the Transcendent who is in some 
incomprehensible way the untouched and inactive Source and Maintainer of all. 
When we think about this we can understand why philosophies such as Sankhya 

reject the idea of Brahman as a Cosmic DoerÐIshwara or Bhagavan. If, however, we 
realize that all relativity is but an appearance without actual substance, then, just as 
we momentarily appear to be humans but are not really so at any time, so Brahman 

is that Reality which appears to us as though it is Ishwara or Bhagavan. In the Þnal 
analysis we realize that action does not a
"
ect God because actionÐin the way we 
134
understand or mistake itÐis impossible for him. And also impossible for us!
Nor is desire for actionÕs fruit in me
To desire something is to imply a lack, deÞciency or a defect in oneÕs self or 
oneÕs life. Since there is no lack, deÞciency or defect in God, it is impossible for him 
to even desireÐmuch less desire either to act or to produce an e
"
ect of action. This, 
too, is our situation. It is only our lesser being that can desire, act, and experience 

the consequences of action. God has no motive that could produce an action, either. 
A question such as ÒWhy did/does God doÉ?Ó is simply absurd, and any answer we 
come up with is doubly absurd. A classic example is the question: Why did God 

make the world? and the even sillier answer: Because he was lonely. The answer, So 
he could share himself with others, is really inexcusable, because we are eternally a 
part of him and already partaking of his being. As I say, any answer is foolish. No 

wonder the wise are so often silent.
Krishna has already spoken of Prakriti, the creative energy by and through which 
all things are done. It is Prakriti that evolves, both in its cosmic and its individual 

states. So, then, is Prakriti a ÒthingÓ separate from God that somehow does his 
ÒwillÓ? No; rather, Prakriti is the creative dreaming faculty of God. Just as we dream 
our many incarnations, so God dreams the many cycles of creation. God, however, 

controls his dreams, whereas we do not until we master our dream through the 
practice of yoga. Then we, too, will no longer have desire for the fruits of action, for 
we will know that there are no actionsÐonly dreams.
Those who understand the foregoing facts can only be the master of their 
activity, never its slave. Because, after all, it is only a concept, a mirageÐnecessary, 

but not ultimately real.
The practical application
Knowing thus, the ancient seekers for liberation performed action. Do you, 
therefore, perform action as did the ancients in earlier times (4:15).
In prehistory there were no such things as mirrors. To see themselves, people 
had to look into water. Some, leaning over to see themselves reßected on the 
waterÕs surface, fell into the water and drowned. In the same way nearly all sentient 
beings fall into the mirage of relative existence by identifying with it and forgetting 
their transcendental reality. Thus they drown in their Þnite life, su
"
ocating and 

ßoundering, yet without being released from it until after incalculable ages they Þnd 
the way back onto the shore of their true Self. Until then any hope of peace and 
freedom from pain is tormenting and tantalizing, as delusive as the rest of their 

experience.
Action, then, is dangerous, a looking into the pool of samsara. In old Greek 
mythology the youth Hylas looked into a pool inhabited by water spirits who 

reached up and pulled him into the water and drowned him so they could keep him 
with them always. In keeping with the rationalizing and delusive nature of the 
human mind, it was reported that he had chosen to go into the water. Well, if he 
135
did, he was still just as drowned and dead as if he had not made that choice.
Since this is our situation, Krishna speaks of how Òthe ancient seekers for 
liberation performed action.Ó For we, who also seek liberation, must know how to 
do the same, performing action Òas did the ancients in earlier times.Ó
136
The Mystery of Action and Inaction
What is action? What is inaction? Even the poet-sages were bewildered 
regarding this matter. This action shall I explain to you, which having known 
you shall be freed from evil (4:16).
When we understand the nature of action (karma) and inaction (akarma) we 
will become free from all impurity in the form of the conditioning resulting from 

action/inaction which we commonly call karma. This verse implies that such 
knowing is purely a spiritual matter and must be approached accordingly. It also 

implies that all karma, positive and negative, are blockages to spiritual progress. We 
need to keep this in mind, as we tend to think of karma only as one or the other.
The foundation of understanding
Truly the nature of action, of wrong action and of non-action is to be 
known. The path of action is di
!
cult to understand (4:17).
PrabhavanandaÕs translation is interpretive, but all translators agree with his 
interpretation and his wording is beautifully clear, so I would like to use it as the 
basis for commentary. ÒYou must learn what kind of work to do, what kind of work 

to avoid, and how to reach a state of calm detachment from your work. The real 
nature of action is hard to understand.Ó
You must learn what kind of work to do, [and] what kind of work to avoid.
 There is no 
place here for the moral dilettanteÕs beloved Òsituation ethics.Ó Regarding the rules 

of right conduct, in the Yoga Sutras Patanjali assures us: ÒThese, not conditioned by 
class, place, time or occasion, and extending to all stages, constitute the Great 

VowÓ (Yoga Sutra 2:31. See 
The Foundations of Yoga
). They can be neither mitigated 
nor abrogated. Many religionists attempt to do so, but their failure in spiritual life 

demonstrates their folly. In contrast, the yogi must carefully study the words of 

realized men and womenÐnot the words of revelated Òmessengers of God,Ó but of 
true saints, true masters, who proved in their lives that their consciousness was 
united with God. These great teachers tell us by their living examples and their 

words what is to done and what is to be avoided.
That is easy to say, but how can we know that a teacher really is genuine? 
Actually, it is not that hard to Þgure out: 
The holy ones of all true religions say the same 
thing.
 Those who deviate from the unanimous testimony of the saints are not to be 
fully trusted, even though they may be sincere and have good qualities. Only those 
who live in the same vision and inner state are completely trustworthy. That, too is 

easy to say. What are some traits we should look for in spiritual teachers? Here are 
a few. They teach:
a) that religions other than theirs are also true.
b) that all seekers of God are ÞndersÐno one is condemned because he does not 
believe in one particular religion, scripture, teacher or prophet.
137
c) the necessity of personal and public morality, and are unanimous in a
!
rming 
the moral teachings to be found in the Yama and Niyama of Patanjali, the Ten 
Commandments of Judaism, the Five Precepts of Buddhism, and the Eight 
Beatitudes of Christianity.
d) that every human being is meant to know God in a direct and immediate 
manner.
e) that an interior life is indispensable for knowing God.

You must learnÉ how to reach a state of calm detachment from your work
. Such a state of 
mind is not attained by reading a few pages of convincing philosophy, but we must 

pursue a path of mental cultivation that will enable us to be established in the 

witness consciousness that is our essential nature. Our problem is that we identify 
with the many layers of energy through which we experience relative existence. We 
not only mistakenly identify with the means of perception, we go a step further and 

identify with what is perceived. This is known as drowning in the ocean of samsara. 
The only antidote to this condition is the practice of yoga, as Krishna points out to 
Arjuna throughout the Gita.
The real nature of action is hard to understand
. This is because of our mistaken 
identities, as just pointed out. Mere intellectual acceptance of Òthe message of the 

GitaÓ is of no value. We must strive for the transmutation of consciousness that is 

itself liberationÐliberation from both action and inaction.
 Two common delusions are to assume that action is the way and inaction must 
be avoided, or that inaction is the way and action is to be avoided. These two 

delusions dominate just about everybody. In India the action/inaction controversy 
continues, to absolutely no conclusion or practical value. The Gita gives a 
completely coherent answer, but still the confusion goes on. This is because it is not 

a matter of thinking about it, but of experiencing the truth of it. Krishna now brings 
this fact out.
Seeing
He who perceives inaction in action and action in inactionÐsuch a man is 
wise among men, steadfast in yoga and doing all action (4:18).
Prabhavananda Þlls it out very well: ÒHe who sees the inaction that is in action, 
and the action that is in inaction, is wise indeed. Even when he is engaged in action 
he remains poised in the tranquility of the Atman.Ó
ÒI am ever the same,Ó says the Self, for it never at any time acts or undergoes 
any change. And yet, it is the presence of the Self that causes the dance-drama of 

the entire chain of evolutionary births which the Self witnesses without ever really 

taking part. This is impossible for the ordinary intellect, however keen, to 
penetrate. But the yogi, daily experiencing himself as the eternal witness (the same 
experience which is intrinsic to God) comes to see that behind all action is the 

inaction of consciousness. Yet, it is the unmoving presence of consciousness that 
stimulates Prakriti, the Divine Creative Energy to act. The Actionless causes all 
Action to take place. Only the yogi can really know this. ÒEven when he is engaged 
138
in action he remains poised in the tranquility of the Atman.Ó
139
The Wise in Action
The eleven major Upanishads present the supreme philosophy, the supreme 
ideal. The Gita, being a virtual digest of the Upanishads, does the same, but it goes 
into the practical application of those principles, and even further into a description 
of the e
"
ects of that application. The Gita describes perfectly the state of the 

enlightened human beingÐat least as perfectly as human speech is able to delineate. 
It is these descriptions which we should study carefully, leaving aside the absurd 
questions that contemporary mind-gamers have come up with such as: Does a jnani 

have a subconscious mindÐand if not, does the jnani dream?
In the Gita we Þnd the psychology of the jnani completely expounded, and it is 
something that cannot possibly be observed by any other than the jnani himself. As 

Yogananda wrote: ÒHe who knowsÐhe knows. None else knows.Ó Our job is to 
become jnanis, not to Þgure out if someone else is a jnaniÐthough that is a lot 
easier on the ego.
Krishna is now going to give us a picture of a sage in action, and yet beyond 
action.
Whose undertakings are devoid of plan and desire for results, whose 
actions are consumed in the Þre of knowledgeÐhim the wise call wise (4:19).
Devoid of plan and desire for results.
 To act rightlyÐto do the right thing in the right 
way at the right time in the right placeÐand nothing more: that is the way of the 

Gita. Therefore, to keep the fruit, the e
"
ect, of an act in mind as our purpose, is to 
deßect ourselves from the right motivation and to entangle ourselves in the net of 
egotism and the snare of binding deeds. Two forces impel us into this trap: desire 

(
kama
) and motive (
sankalpa
).
Kama is desire, passion, or lust. The Þrst meaning, that of desire, is uppermost 
in this part of the Gita. Though people can pursue action with a blinding and 

binding passion, it is best for us to think mostly of simple desire, since the palest 
shade of desire can mar our action. Also, desire can be incredibly subtle and 
undetectable to any but the keenest intelligence. Passion and lust, on the other 

hand, are extremely obvious and impossible to disguiseÐthough many in their grip 
pretend that they are being dedicated, noble, and fervent in a righteous cause. 
Human beings can talk themselves into anything. But sensible people can see the 

Þend beneath the fever. Desire, though, is capable of disguising itself or hiding itself 
completely from all but the most perceptive. This is why tapasya, not intellectual 
analysis, is the only sure way of uprooting this subtle enemy.
Sankalpa is wish, desire, volition, resolution, will, determination, and intention. 
Yes; all that. Any kind of intentionsÐincluding subconscious onesÐmar action. Even 

the slightest wish or hope in relation to the result of an action turns it into a bond. 

No wonder Krishna says later on: ÒTruly this maya of mine made of the gunas is 
di
!
cult to go beyondÓ (7:14).
140
But when a person becomes absolutely free of kama and sankalpa, his action 
slips away like a loosened bond. Even more: the binding power of the act is broken 
so it cannot arise in the future to be a hindrance. Someone in this state then ceases 
to create any more karma.
Whose actions are consumed in the Þre of knowledge.
 There is a lot of talk about 
eliminating karma, as though it were something to throw away or wash down the 

drain. Not so. Karma must be burned in the Þre of knowledgeÐ
jnanagni
. As genuine 

camphor burns and leaves no residue whatsoever, but just vanishes, so it is with 
karma burned in the Þre of knowledge. It is absurd to say that a liberated person 
still has to undergo his prarabdha karmaÐkarma that has begun to manifest and 

bear fruit. This mythology is a rationalization put forth by whose who claim their 
guru is liberated while still very obviously bound by karma. A liberated person may 
decide to remain in this world, though having no karma to fulÞll. God does not 

need karma to enable him to project the creation, and a liberated being does not 
need any karma to remain here on earth. If he cannot do so, then he is not a Master, 
and not liberated.
(However, some masters can selectively burn their karma, and retain miniscule 
karmic ÒthreadsÓ which they can use to more easily come into future incarnations. 

Nevertheless, they are not bound or obligated by prarabdha karma. They are 

masters even of karma.)
Complete in the Self
Having abandoned attachment for actionÕs fruit, always content, not 
dependent on anything even when acting, he truly does nothing at all (4:20).
Nevertheless, he does act. That is, he turns his face from the fruits of action, not 
even looking at them, lest like Eve (Genesis 3:6), he be drawn again to desire them 
and fall away from the state he has so laboriously attained.
The enlightened man is literally 
Self
-su
!
cient. ÒWhen he leaves behind all the 
desires of the mind, contented in the Self by the Self, then he is said to be steady in 

wisdomÓ (2:55). ÒHe who is content only in the Self, who is satisÞed in the Self, 
who is pleased only in the Self: for him there is no need to actÓ (3:17).
Having gone beyond the realm of action, he truly Òperceives inaction in action 
and action in inactionÓ (4:18).
Complete control
Acting with the body alone, without wish, with thought and lower self 
restrained, abandoning all acquisitiveness, though acting he incurs no fault 
[guilt or evil] (4:21).
Here again we see that Krishna is not advocating some kind of self-e
"
acing 
passivity. Rather he is showing us heroic endeavor. Certainly the wise man does not 

desire or will the fruits of action, but to ensure he never again falls into the old 
pattern of delusion he exercises absolute control over body and mind. 
Enlightenment is not an avoidance of body and mind and their inßuences, it is 
141
mastery in the fullest sense.
For ages in India a crippling passivity and indi
"
erence has been cultivated due to 
the degenerative inßuence, especially, of ignorant sannyasis who have held a 
completely wrong idea about their own way of lifeÐa wrong idea which they hold up 

to non-monastics as an ideal to also follow. Shamefulness has become a virtue, 
cowardice touted as courage, and ine
"
ectiveness as skill in action. Yet the Gita has 
all the time stood in virile contrast to this e
"
ete cowardice and cultivated 

incompetence.
Swami Vivekananda devoted his life to arousing his countrymen to abandon the 
horrible morass into which they were complacently sinking. Still the illusion 

prevails. No wonder many in India feel that they need to shake o
"
 religious 
inßuence to become self-respecting and worthy human beings. This is a sad 
misconception, for as Vivekananda remarked upon returning to India after his Þrst 

trip abroad, IndiaÕs problem is not its religion, but the fact that it has not been 
rightly practiced. The deadening e
"
ect of the false ÒbrahmarishisÓ has blinded not 
only India but the world to the way of the ÒrajarishisÓ advocated by Krishna.
Controlling body and mind the wise realizes that he is the Self. Nothing is his 
own, for the Self transcends all things. Thus he acts and incurs no karma.
Symptoms of control
Now comes a verse that the foolish have used to bolster their advocacy of 
passivity and worthlessnessÐof spiritual and mental novocain.
Content with what comes unbidden, beyond the pairs of opposites and 
free from envy, the same in success or failure, even though acting, he is not 
bound (4:22).
I will not waste your time pointing out what this does not mean. Others will do 
that gladlyÐand solely.
Content with what comes unbidden.
 That is, he is content with whatever occurs or 
comes to him as a result of his prarabdha karma, the karma that is presently 
manifesting as this particular life. This karma is spontaneous, occurring 
automatically.
The wise man accepts that which comes to him because it is his own action 
coming to fruition. He does not desire or anticipate the fruits of his present actions, 

but he thoroughly accepts the advent of the results of his past actions that have 

created this life and determined its quality and events. Does this mean he is merely 
passive, with a ÒWhat can I do?Ó attitude? Not at all. He understands that his 
prarabdha karma is not some kind of reactive payback for past deeds, but that its 

purpose is his learning, his evolution. Karma is a real lesson in living. We accept it, 
but we also study it and learn what it is saying to us. Otherwise we will fail the 
lesson and have to keep taking it over and over until we do learn. The adage that 

history repeats itself is true because we do not learn from it and apply it to our 
personal life as well.
The intelligent individual understands that all our life is a learning session, that 
142
pleasant karma is not to just be enjoyed or unpleasant karma endured or avoided. 
Rather, it is to be learned from. We must get involved with our karma and use it for 
our betterment. Karma is not fate; it is opportunity. Only when we live accordingly 
can we be considered worthy of human birth. Meeting karma head-on is the way to 

master it and proÞt from it. This requires our full acceptance of it, but with the 
right understanding of it.
Beyond the dualities [pairs of opposites].
 Whatever comes or goes is a matter of his 
own previous choicesÐso the yogi views all phenomena, not preferring one or the 

other. This is because he sees value in both the pleasant and the unpleasant, seeing 
neither of them as undesirable. They are part of his life-script which he must read 

and comprehend. Everything is for his betterment. Consequently he looks to the 
wisdom to be gained and not the superÞcial external experience.
Free from envy. 
He is free from envy or greed because whatever comes to him is a 
matter of his own doing. Who will he envy? Can he be jealous of someone who had 

the good sense to order the right things from the storehouse of life? He could have 
the same if he had been wiser, and he can get anything he wants in the future. He 

need only use life more competently. No wonder Buddha kept emphasizing the need 
for skillful action. It is pointless to attempt transcending this life until we have lived 
it worthily. Many yogis come to naught because they think yoga is a means of 

escape from the lessons of life. Until we learn, we do not graduate to a higher 
grade. ÒThose who are too good for this world are adorning some other,Ó as Swami 
Sri Yukteswar often pointed out. Until then, here we will stay. 
The same in success or failure.
 This is not because he shrugs and says: ÒOh, well, 
that is my karma,Ó and bumbles on without a sense of responsibility. Yes, indeed, it 

is his karma, whether of the present or the past, and it reveals how well or how 

poorly he acted in the past. He may not desire certain results of his actions, but he 
deÞnitely gets their message. Success and failure are only symptoms of wisdom or 
folly. He astutely evaluates the root of his consciousness, seeing his actions as the 

branches and leaves of that root. His work is with the root; the rest will follow suit 
when the right quality has been attained. E
"
ects have value only as indicators of the 
nature of the cause. He knows this, and is intent only on the rectiÞcation of the 

cause: his state of awareness.
Even though acting, he is not bound.
 For he does not look at the results of action, but 
is the witness of the acts. The Self is never touched or bound by action. Centering 

his consciousness in the truth of his being through diligent practice of meditation, 
he is freed from karmic e
"
ects.
Once again we see the value of Vyasa presenting the teachings of the Gita in the 
context of the Mahabharata War. Krishna is urging Arjuna to engage in battle, 

assuring him that if he does so rightly he will incur no negative karma. Instead, he 
will be released from the karma that brought him to Kurukshetra, the Field of 

Dharma. If this is true of warfare, how can we hesitate to engage optimistically in 
our comparatively easy and insigniÞcant karmic struggles?
143
The result
The karma of one who is free from attachment, whose thought is 
established in knowledge, undertaking action for sacriÞce, is wholly dissolved 
(4:23).
It is a matter of both knowledge and attitude.
Brahman is the o
"
ering, Brahman is the oblation poured out by Brahman 
into the Þre of Brahman. Brahman is to be attained by him who always sees 
Brahman in action (4:24).
Knowers of Brahman know their entire life as sacriÞce (yajna). Here, 
particularly, the Þre sacriÞce or havan is the symbol of the BrahmajnaniÕs unbroken 

awareness of Brahman.
Brahman is the o
!
ering.
 All action whatsoever is a manifestation of the power of 
God. Everything that is done is God. This is because the entire realm of relative 

existence is not a thing at all; at no time does it have a material, objective existence. 
Rather, it is the thought of God, the divine Thinker, the dream of God, the divine 
Dreamer. It is a motionless movement within the Consciousness that is God. Thus 

everything is God in the most literal and most absolute sense. The Òo
"
eringÓ of 
evolution within relative existence is Brahman itself. There is nothing else.
Brahman is the oblation.
 Everything that we deal with in our evolutionary journey, 
whatever we employ to further the expansion of our consciousness, whatever we 

o
"
er to God in our attempt to ascend to the AbsoluteÐall that is Brahman alone.
Poured out by Brahman.
 All the waves of the ocean are the ocean. Every sentient 
being, every spark of individualized consciousness, is Brahman. Those who seek 

Brahman 
are
 Brahman. That is, Brahman is their essential, inseparable nature. None 
but Brahman worships and seeks Brahman. None but Brahman Þnds Brahman.
Into the Þre of Brahman.
 Again, the entire range of dynamic, seemingly ever-
changing Þeld of evolutionary life is Brahman alone. It is Brahman that is the 
transmuting Þre of the cosmos. Brahman is itself the Eternal Phoenix that is 

perpetually consumed by itself and produced from itself in never-ending cycles that 
are themselves Òthe Þre of Brahman.Ó
Brahman is to be attained by him who always sees Brahman in action.
 ÒThe yogi whose 
mind is truly tranquil, with emotions [passions] calmed, free of evil, having become 

one with Brahman, attains the supreme happiness. Thus constantly engaging 
himself in the practice of yoga, that yogi, freed from evil, easily contacting 

[touching] Brahman, attains boundless happiness. He who is steadfast in yoga 
[yoga-yukta] at all times sees the Self present in all beings and all beings present in 
the Self. He who sees me everywhere, and sees all things in meÐI am not lost to 

him, and he is not lost to me. He, established in unity, worships me dwelling in all 
things; whatever be his mode of life, that yogi ever abides in meÓ (6:27-31).
Even if at the time it is mostly intellectual rather than purely intuitive, we must 
strive to Òsee throughÓ all action to Brahman, the Ground of All Being.
144
SacriÞcial O
"
erings
The ideal of sacriÞce
In every religion we Þnd the idea of sacriÞce, of making o
"
erings to God Who, 
being inÞnite and all-encompassing, and therefore all-possessing, cannot really be 
o
"
ered to. Yet, in the training Þlm we call samsara, the act of will involved in 

o
"
ering to God is essential to the development of each of us. For we can make 
o
"
erings to our own SelfÐand hence to BrahmanÐin the form of acts which purify 
and evolve the vehicles of the Self. Krishna is now going to enumerate the various 

forms of sacriÞcial elements and acts.
Before studying this and the next verses it is necessary for us to understand that 
all described here are yogis, that Krishna is not denigrating anyone, nor he is 

propounding a narrow vision of what is acceptable sacriÞce to the Divine. He is, 
instead, showing us that there are many ways to o
"
er unto God, and that all are 
legitimate and worthy of regard. Certainly, some are more sophisticated than 

others, yet every step in the stair, every rung on the ladder, is important for it leads 
us on to higher realities.
This is particularly seen in the following verse, where Krishna presents as viable 
two approaches that today are almost universally viewed as antithetical to one 

another, the Þrst usually being considered useless and ignorant.
Gods and Brahman-Self
Some yogis o
"
er sacriÞce to the gods alone, while others o
"
er the 
[individual] Self as sacriÞce unto the [Supreme] Self into the Þre that is 
Brahman (4:25).
Here we Þnd two approaches to Divinity: that which sees it as objectÐgods or 
GodÐand that which sees it as SubjectÐBrahman or the Atman-Self. Both approaches 

are legitimately yogic. Certainly worship or meditation directed to God as a separate 
being is not as on target as meditation on the identity of the yogiÕs Self with 
Brahman. Nevertheless such meditation leads the consciousness of the yogi upward 

and will eventually bestow on him the wider vision of Divinity as one with him. To 
despise the lesser approach is as silly as to despise learning the alphabet because it 
is superseded by reading. The latter cannot occur without the former. The o
"
ering 

of the Þrst type of yogis is devotion of the heartÐno small gift. The second type of 
yogi o
"
ers his Self by merging it into the greater life of Brahman. Brahman is called 
Þre because such a union purges the yogi of all extraneous matter, of all that is not 

eternal and divine. Yet, the Þrst form of o
"
ering will culminate in the second form if 
persevered in.
Yajnam yajnena
 is an interesting expression: ÒsacriÞce by sacriÞce.Ó The original 
sacriÞce (yajna) was the projection of all levels of relative existence along with the 

entering into it of Brahman as the Witness of All. That is, Brahman dreamed the 
145
dream of creation and of incarnating within it as its all-experiencing Self. Brahman 
is dreaming the same dream we are, but without loss of control or consciousness. 
This is an important fact for us to know. In Sanskrit terminology formulated later 
than the Gita, the witnessing consciousness of Brahman within creation is called 

the Mahat Tattwa, the Supreme Principle, Ishwara.
The great Christian esotericist James Ingall Wedgwood, a leading Þgure in the 
Theosophical Society and founder of the Liberal Catholic Church, wrote the 

following prayer: ÒWe lift our hearts in adoration to Thee,É Who, abiding 
unchangeable within Thyself, didst nevertheless in the mystery of Thy boundless 
love and Thine eternal sacriÞce breathe forth Thine own divine life into Thy 

universe,É. Omnipotent, all-pervading, by that self-same sacriÞce Thou dost 
continually uphold all creation,Ó referring to it as Òthe enduring SacriÞce by which 
the world is nourished and sustained.Ó
Just as we experience a series of incarnation in bodies, so Brahman, in Its 
extension as Ishwara, experiences a series of incarnation through an unending 

series of creation cyclesÐdays and nights of Brahma. Seeking for union with 

Brahman in an intelligent and orderly mannerÐin other words, through the practice 
of dharma and yogaÐis our way of engaging in ÒsacriÞce by sacriÞce.Ó
The senses
Others o
"
er senses such as hearing into the Þres of restraint; others, 
sound; and others objects of the senses into the Þre of the senses (4:26).
It is signiÞcant that the sense of sound (shabda) which arises from the subtlest 
level of our being, the akasha (ether), is mentioned speciÞcally here. Yogis employ 
subtle sound in and out of meditation in the form of japa: mantra repetition.
Once again we encounter a duality. See the eminent wisdom of Krishna. He does 
not disdain one and exalt the other just because one may be more disciplined and 

consistent with ultimate spiritual principles than the other. He a
!
rms the value of 

both. There can be sectarianism of discipline as well as of doctrine, and Krishna is 
leading us away from that error.
Some yogis cut o
"
 and avoid all sense-experience beyond what is inevitable in 
the maintenance of a simple life. Many refuse to look around them but always look 

down so as not to be distracted by the sense of sight. Others contrive to avoid 
enjoyment of the taste of food in various ways, such as mixing ashes with their food 

(not a very healthy practice) or mixing all the types of food together in a kind of 
hodgepodge, combining even the sweet with the salty. (This latter is more common 
among Indian yogis, Yogananda even having done so in his youth.) To such yogis 

Òsenses are the o
"
ering, and self-discipline the sacriÞcial ÞreÓ (Prabhavananda).
A completely opposite course is allowing sense-impressions without avoidance, 
keeping vividly in mind that all things are manifestations of Brahman. We must not 

misunderstand this approach. It is not Òliving life to the fullÓ by romping around 
greedily pursuing and delighting in mere sensory experience, wallowing in the mire 
of material consciousness while claiming that Òall is God.Ó This is the perversion of 
146
ignorance. Rather, Krishna is speaking of those who willingly experience natural 
beauty and the enjoyment of simple and beneÞcial things such as food, the warmth 
of shelter, the ease of good health, and suchlike. Even these yogis would be 
considered much too disciplined and ascetic for the hedonistic ÒspiritualityÓ of the 

incurably worldly.
This second type of yogi freely employs the senses in spiritual devotion. They 
o
"
er the fragrance and beauty of ßowers, the perfume of incense, the light of lamps, 

and the taste of food (prasadam) in worship. They also enjoy the beauty and 
inspiration of divine imagery and of devotional music. In this way they consciously 
o
"
er Brahman to Brahman.
There is a third way in relation to the senses:
Some o
"
er all the actions of the senses and the functions of the life force 
(prana) into the Þre of the yoga of self-restraint, which is enkindled by 
knowledge (4:27).
Whereas the two types of yogis mentioned before have some identity with the 
senses, this third type ÒrenouncesÓ them and their functions. The way they do this 

is described in the next chapter of the Gita in these two verses: ÒÔI do not do 
anything;Õ thus thinks the steadfast knower of truth [while; when] seeing, hearing, 
touching, smelling, eating, walking, sleeping, breathing, speaking, releasing, and 

holding, opening and closing his eyesÐconvinced that it is the senses that move 
among the sense-objectsÓ (5:8-9).
We will look into this more later in considering the next chapter. But we should 
seriously consider that Krishna tells us this form of o
"
ering is Òkindled by 

knowledge,Ó indicating that this discipline is established only in those who have 
begun to already experience or intuit the Self within themselves through buddhi 

yoga. He also is telling us that discipline is a result of wisdom. So when we 
encounter a ÒsageÓ who freely imparts his ÒknowledgeÓ we should look at how 
disciplined he is, and thereby know whether his knowledge is real or mere words.
Renunciation, discipline, and knowledge
Those whose sacriÞces take the form of yoga o
"
er material possessions 
and tapasya as sacriÞces; while ascetics with stringent vows o
"
er self-analysis 
[swadhyaya] and knowledge as sacriÞce (4:28).
Dravyayajnas
 means those who sacriÞce through material things by either using 
them for higher purpose, or by renouncing them. For example, a person might give 

away all or much of what he has in good causes, or he also might renounce by 
refusing to engage in a form of livelihood that will bring in much money but 

distract him from spiritual life by making too many demands on his time. Refusing 
to do something unethical that would have resulted in material gain is also a form 
of renunciation-sacriÞce.
Spiritual discipline and practice, especially yoga, is a very high form of sacriÞce. 
And those who are intensely serious will ruthlessly study and analyze their inner 

and outer actions as well as their mental states in order to detect any hidden 
147
negativity or ignorance and cut them o
"
, objectively diagnosing their present 
spiritual status. The knowledge they o
"
er is threefold: that gained from self-study, 
that attained through intuition developed by meditation, and that found in the 
study of sacred texts and the teachings of the wise. They also may extend or 

intensify their disciplines and spiritual practices.
The pranas (life forces)
Some o
"
er inhalation into exhalation, and exhalation into inhalation, 
restraining the paths of inhalation and exhalation, intent upon control of the 
breath (pranayama) (4:29).
The senses are merely instruments of perception powered by various forms of 
subtle life force known as the pranas. In PatanjaliÕs Yoga Sutras we are told that 

meditation consists of several ingredients. One is pranayama.
It is usually thought that pranayama is composed of the words 
prana
 and 
yama
, 
which mean breath (or life-force) and restraint (or control). But it really comes 

from 
prana
 (breath) and 
ayama
, which means lengthening, expansion, and 
extension. In meditation the breath becomes subtle, reÞned, and slow (lengthened, 
expanded, and extended). Yoga Sutra 2:50 says that pranayama Òbecomes measured 
or regulated [paridrishto], prolonged [dirgha], and subtle or attenuated 

[sukshmah].Ó ÒProlonged and light [subtle],Ó says Vyasa. Sometimes it is long and 
slow and sometimes it is slow but short. Whichever it may be, it is always 
spontaneous and not controlledÐor even deliberately intendedÐin any way. 

Pranayama, then, is an e
"
ect, not a practice. This can be accomplished through 
objective observation of the breath, or even by simply sitting in right posture 
(asana) in a relaxed manner and being inwardly aware in meditation. However it is 

accomplished, if it is o
"
ered to God pranayama becomes a factor for the yogiÕs 
upliftment. This verse is also about the pranayama called ÒcirclingÓ in which the 
inhaling and exhaling breaths are seamless, smooth and continuous. That is, there 

is no deliberate pause between them, but the moment the inhalation ends the 
exhalation begins, and vice versa. When the yogi is truly relaxed this is his natural 
way of breathing.
Others who have restricted their food o
"
er the pranas into the pranas  
[since all the forms of prana are derived from food]
 (4:30a).
That is, they o
"
er the prana of the food they eat into the present pranas of the 
body.
The food we eat nourishes and conditions the various streams of life-force, of 
prana, in the body, so diet is also a means of controlling prana. Regulation of food 

includes moderation in the amount of food eaten, and also discrimination in the 
type of food eaten. The yogi must adopt a diet that conduces to health of body and 
stability of mind. Consequently he must absolutely avoid all meat, Þsh, eggs, 

alcohol, nicotine, and mind-altering drugs. At the same time the food he eats must 
be beneÞcial to the body and not whimsical or faddish. Krishna will discuss this at 
length in the beginning of the seventeenth chapter.
148
The various sacriÞcers
All these are knowers of sacriÞce whose wrongdoings have been 
annihilated through sacriÞce (4:30b).
Kalmasas
 means evils or wrongdoingsÐthe negative karmas (including mental 
e
"
ects) accruing from negative actions. By the many sacriÞces listed by Krishna, the 
negative karmas and conditionings produced by past negative action are dissolved 
and the yogis attain freedom.
Eating the amrita of the sacriÞcial remains, they go to the Eternal 
Brahman. Even this world is not for the non-sacriÞcingÐhow then the other 

worlds? (4:31).
The entire life of the knowers of sacriÞce is prasadamÐthat which has been Þrst 
o
"
ered to God and is thus holy and purifying to the partaker. Such a life leads to 

participation in the life of Brahman.
But those whose lives are not sacriÞce, are not worship of the Eternal, will Þnd 
that there can be no lasting peace or meaning for them in any world, because all 

worlds are manifestations of God whose sole purpose is the life in GodÐnothing 

else. Those who live selÞshly and godlessly alienate themselves from the entire 
cosmos. Where, then, can they Þnd any rest? It is hopeless. But those who live 
sacriÞcially in the spirit of worship Þnd themselves at home everywhere.
SacriÞces of many kinds are spread out before the face of Brahman. Know 
them all to be born from action. Knowing thus, you shall be liberated (4:32).
Once more Krishna points out the necessity of action and the impossibility of 
inaction for the adept yogi.
149
The Worship of Brahman
Better than the sacriÞce of material things is knowledge-sacriÞce. All 
action without exception is fully contained in knowledge (4:33).
To know God is the supreme sacriÞce-worship, immeasurably beyond o
"
ering 
material objects in sacriÞce. Yet, once more Krishna is warning us away from 
ignorant snobbery. For he assures us that all actionÐincluding ritualistic, material 
sacriÞce and worshipÐleads to the attainment of knowledge. We must never disdain 
any endeavor in spiritual life, for such action creates positive spiritual karma that 

will eventually result in enlightenment. Enlightened people are aware that every 
attempt to attain higher life will in time uplift the seeker. Remembering their own 
past struggles, they know that no e
"
ort is ever wasted, that the intention will 

perfect the action. ÒIn this no e
"
ort is lost, nor are adverse results 
producedÓ (2:40), Krishna has told Arjuna.
Teachers
Know that by prostrating yourself, by questioning and by serving them, 
the wise who have realized the truth will therefore instruct you in that 
knowledge (4:34).
Since this verse is continually misapplied to the cultish slavery of gurudom, we 
should analyze it very carefully.
First we are told that illumined teachers will instruct us in knowledge 
(
upadekshyanti te jnanam
). They will teach us the principles of Brahmajnana, which 

includes the practice of meditation by which the knowledge of Brahman is attained. 

This is a wonderful prospect, but it says nothing more than this. There is no word 
of empowerment or diksha (initiation) being given by the teacher, or his taking on 
the studentÕs karma or the forging of some type of eternal bond in which the 

teacher is obligated to bestow enlightenment. In other words, the manipulative 
super-parent type of disempowerment and enslavement so current today in 
guruland is not in KrishnaÕs mind.
He does tell Arjuna that the seeker must approach the teacher with humble 
salutation (
pranipatena
) and must actively question (
pariprashnena
) him. Moreover, 
the seeker must render service (
sevaya
). This is because at the time of Krishna 

teachers lived in forest ashrams and seekers were expected to live with them for 
some time to learn the practice of spiritual life as well as its philosophy. Therefore 
they helped in any kind of work that needed doing.
Krishna was quite familiar with a type of seeker found even today. Approaching 
the teacher as a virtual equal, they set themselves down in front of him and unload 

a barrage of metaphysical questions intended to determine whether or not the 

teacher is worthy of their attention. If they decide the teacher is worthy, they 
proceed to monopolize his time and attention, disregarding anyone else, expecting 
150
to be waited on and supplied with whatever they might want, assuming that 
everyone in the ashram is a servant whose existence is justiÞed by serving them and 
the guru.
Krishna points out that the seeker is expected to help out in the ashram and be 
of beneÞt to his fellow seekers. Be assured that this has nothing to do with the 

Òkarma yogaÓ projects of ambitious gurus entailing grinding labor and ÒvoluntaryÓ 
deprivation. The service an authentic spiritual teacher desires is careful attention 

and the putting into practice of the teachings he imparts. Unlike the ancient 
Pharaohs, such a teacher has no desire to turn his students into slaves dragging 
over hot sands the stones with which he will build a monument to himself. 

Remember: Krishna has in mind the quiet forest ashrams where the teacher and 
students lived in utmost simplicity. The service expected was equally humble and 
simple.
Also, since the days when Vyasa wrote the Gita on palm leaves with a wooden 
stylus dipped in ink made of berries, a wonderful thing has appeared in the world: 

the printing press. Millions throughout the world can now learn the wisdom of 

great master-teachers of all ages and traditions. It is still good to Þnd a worthy 
teacher who will share his accumulated knowledge with us and give us personal 
advice, but it is not absolutely necessary. ÒSpirituality cannot be gotten out of 

books!Ó some may hasten to say. True. But neither can you get spirituality from any 
external source, including the greatest of yogis. Spirituality arises from within as a 
result of spiritual maturation and the personal application of spiritual teachingsÐ

teachings that 
can
 be gotten from a book as well as a person. Even when reading the 
writings of a great master we must be respectful and alert, seeking to comprehend 

the slightest and most subtle of his teachingsÐand intend to apply them.
True masters never die. We can approach them prayerfully in the depth of our 
hearts and seek their spiritual assistance. There is no reason why we cannot become 

the disciple of any master, no matter how long ago he lived on the earth. Like Jesus, 

true masters can assure us: ÒLo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
worldÓ (Matthew 28:20). Nor need we limit ourselves to inwardly approaching only 
one teacher.
True jnana
Know this, and you shall not again fall into delusion. By this you shall 
come to see all creation in your Self and then in me (4:35).
True enlightenment is a state in which delusion can no longer arise. The 
enlightened are absolutely incapable of falling back into ignorance. Until this state 
is reached, however, no matter how highly evolved a person may become he is still 
capable of being overcome by ignorance and of plunging back into the swamp of 
spiritual degradation. Therefore we must be wary at all times and aware of our 

potential for a fall. (It is not a bad idea to keep in mind that this is true of most 
teachers, as well.)
The sure sign of a coming fall is a yogiÕs boasting that he has transcended all evil 
151
and is incapable of wrongdoing. No enlightened person speaks in such a manner. 
Those who have conÞdence in their attainment are still in the grip of ego, and 
therefore capable of any evil. This is why genuine humility is a characteristic of the 
truly enlightened. No boasting or claims are made by the truly wise, nor do the 

liberated crow about their freedom.
The fundamental trait of enlightenment is stated by Krishna: ÒBy this you shall 
come to see all creation in your Self and then in me.Ó InÞnity will become the 

constant interior state. Nothing as petty as psychic powers or fascinating 
personality traits constitute the proÞle of the enlightened. InÞnite consciousness is 
the trait of the illumined being. If you had met the great Swami Sivananda you 

would know what I mean. His inÞnity and his humility were equally evident.
The enlightened person perceives both his Self and the Supreme Self. He sees 
them as two and knows them as One. Regarding this he can say, speaking of his Self 

and the Absolute Self:
That is the Full, this is the Full.
The Full has come out of the Full.
If we take the Full from the Full
It is the Full that yet remains.
This is the authentic advaita vision, not the simplistic monism so common 
today, especially in the West. Those who study and apply the wisdom of the Gita 

will avoid much error and outright nonsense.
Made pure
Even if you should be the most sinful among all the sinful, yet you would 
cross over all sin by the raft of knowledge alone. As the kindled Þre reduces 
wood to ashes, in the same way the Þre of knowledge reduces all karmas to 

ashes. No puriÞer equal to knowledge is found here in the world. He who is 
himself perfected in yoga in time Þnds knowledge in the Self (4:36-38).
It is frequently stated that Shankara in his commentaries and other writings 
seems to overemphasize jnana (knowledge), but when we look at portions of the 

Gita such as this one we see why he considered jnana the prime necessity. For here 
Krishna is telling us that jnana is the absolute power of liberationÐspeciÞcally 

liberation from the e
"
ects of evil action.
KnowledgeÐthe divine knowledge inherent in the SelfÐfrees us from evil in two 
aspects. It frees us from the psychological conditioningsÐespecially the addictionsÐ

resulting from wrongdoing, and it burns to ashes the karmas we have accumulated 
by past wrong action. In every way, jnana destroys sin (papa) to the uttermost 
degree. And Krishna assures us that jnana itself can do thisÐnothing else is needed. 

Further, he tells us that when we are perfect in yoga we Þnd this knowledge in our 
own hearts, for it is eternal, inseparable from the Self. So can we fault Shankara for 
putting such a high valuation on jnana?
152
Faith leads to knowledge
He who possesses faith attains knowledge. Devoted to that pursuit, 
restraining the senses, having attained knowledge he quickly attains supreme 
peace (4:39).
Since knowledge is the last step in enlightenment, there must be many prior 
steps. The one next to knowledge is faithÐshraddha. Now, shraddha is not the weak 

ÒfaithÓ of the English language, based on intellectual belief or blind acceptance of 

anotherÕs words, but is a dynamic force, a spontaneous uprising from within of an 
intuitive knowledge or conviction. It is a kind of precognition, and is itself an 
embryonic form of knowledge. So it is knowledge, a foreshadowing of the fully 

developed vision that culminates in enlightenment, that 
is
 enlightenment, the 
Supreme Peace (
param shantim
).
Doubt
The man who is ignorant and without faith, of a doubting nature, is 
ruined. Neither this world, nor the next, nor happiness is for the man of 
doubt (4:40).
The way in which Krishna puts this Þrst sentence, we can see that to him a 
doubter is ignorant and faithless, that the three qualities of ignorance, inÞdelity, 

and doubt are united in such a one and that destruction is the natural consequence 
for him. Not that the Self is ever destroyed, but certainly the intelligence that is the 
distinctive characteristic of the evolving human being can be so distorted and 

fragmented that it can be said to be destroyedÐuseless and even destructive. It is 
not impossible for the subtle bodies to become so damaged that they do dissolve 
and the individual spirit has to begin its evolutionary journey over againÐsometimes 

from the very beginning. But though such a thing may be rare, for all doubters there 
is no happiness or peace in this or any other world.
Is Krishna agreeing with all the religions that sharply condemn those that doubt 
their teachings and predict dire consequences for their doubt? No. Krishna is not 

speaking of someone who honestly questions or wonders if the doctrines of religion 
are true. Those who have honest doubts or questions need not feel censured by 

Krishna. Without doubt of the right kind there is no resolution of doubt and the 
gaining of right conviction. Rather, Krishna is speaking of those in whom doubt is a 
symptom of willful ignorance, of refusal to accept what they inwardly know is truth. 

We all know people who reject the truth when it inconveniences, embarrasses, or 
condemns them. It is this deliberate and conscious denial, this hypocrisy, that later 
manifests as the kind of doubt Krishna is referring to. Many people actively war 

against what they know to be right and true. It is these that shall in time Þnd there 
is no place for them in any world. Having sinned against truth, what is left for 
them? In contrast:
Action does not bind him whose actions are renounced in yoga, whose 
doubt is severed by knowledge, and who is self-possessed (4:41).
153
The core problem
Krishna is not a mere speaker of words, but a knower of the hearts of those to 
whom he speaks. Going directly to the root of ArjunaÕs hesitation in the face of 
battle, he says to him:
Therefore, having severed with the sword of your own knowledge this 
doubt that proceeds from ignorance abiding in your heart, arise! Take refuge 

in yoga (4:42).
Doubting the Self
There are doubts that are rational and doubts that are irrational. Relative 
experience has dominated us for creation cycles, so it is understandable that we 
might doubt the glorious truth of the SelfÐnot the fact that it exists, but the fullness 
of its wonder and its transforming, creative, transcendent power, what to speak of 

its accessibility through yoga. It is, of course, delusion that hides the reality of the 
Self from us and makes us doubt the words of Krishna and the sages of the 
Upanishads upon whose teachings the Gita is based. Yoga, however, directly reveals 

to us the truth of the Atman-Self and removes doubt as the rising sun dispels even 
the densest darkness.
The sword
Before we experience the Self, however, we must set our will to practice yoga for 
its revelation. This requires some intellectual conviction. We need to analyze our 
entire life, and especially our consciousness of it, for that consciousness is our Self. 
We need to distinguish (discriminate) between that which is experiencing our life 
and that which is being experienced. One is unchanging and the other is ever 

changing. We must look to the unchanging and know that as real, and understand 
the shifting patterns of light and shadow around us as a dreamÐnecessary and 
instructive, but for all that only a dream. With the sword of our discrimination, 

then, we can pierce through the veils that hide the truth from us and cast them 
aside forever.
It is no small thing that Krishna refers to Òthe sword of your own knowledge,Ó 
for nothing but our own realization will erase ignorance and doubt. If we have no 

knowledge of our own, then any ÒfaithÓ we may think we have is a fantasy, a 
delusion. People who believe something merely because some person or bookÐ

including the GitaÐsays so have no faith at all, only superstition. Until they rid 
themselves of such non-faith they will never know the truth which Krishna speaks. 
This is why atheism can be a positive thing: we often have to rid ourselves of silly 

and baseless religion before we can clear our minds enough to come to true faith 
and knowledge. Once a man told Sri Ramakrishna he was an atheist. Sri 
Ramakrishna said: ÒThat, too, is a stageÓ on the way to realization.
We cannot live on the food other people eat, and we cannot live on the 
knowledge of othersÐwho, if they were real knowers (jnanis) would tell us that 
154
themselves.
Arise!
Positive action is required of usÐnot a running about and making noise as is the 
way of so much religion, but an interior activity: meditation. We must express in 
our outer life the insight meditation has given us. Then we can Þght the battle of 
life from within the fortress of Right Action, of Karma Yoga.
At all times we are Arjuna, needing to heed the life-evoking words of Krishna, 
words that are the doors to freedom in the SelfÐin God.
155
Action: Renounced and Performed
Duality and di
"
erentiation are the bedrock of relativity and delusion, and human 
beings desperately cling to them to preserve their beloved illusions and maintain 
their false independence from SpiritÐa condition that produces nothing but 
su
"
ering, yet is desperately held on to. Why is this? Because the Self has been 

pushed out of the way by the ego which has taken control. By keeping our 
consciousness in duality and di
"
erentiation the ego perpetuates its powerÐeven its 
very existence, for the consciousness of Oneness that is the truth will dissolve the 

ego. So although I have said that ÒweÓ cling to delusion, it is the ego that is holding 
on Òfor dear lifeÓÐnot us. Only when we break that hold will we truly begin to live.
Even as we progress in consciousness we Þnd the habit of duality persisting, and 
we often drag it into our attempts at spiritual reasoning. More than once in the Gita 

Arjuna presents Krishna with an either/or question that mirrors this illusion. 
Krishna explains the truth of the matter, and in doing so reveals the error of the 

question itself. We have come to one of those points. Not without a hint of 
complaint and accusation:
Arjuna said: You praise renunciation of actions and again you praise karma 
yoga. Which one is the better of these two? Tell me deÞnitely (5:1).
In other words: ÒWhich one of these can I throw away?Ó In our intellectual 
laziness we demand a simplistic, streamlined outlook so we can avoid the e
"
ort of 
combining two seeming contradictions in order to Þnd out the truth that lies 
between themÐand includes them. We demand a false unity so we can perpetuate 
our false duality. Fortunately for Arjuna and us Krishna never concedes to this 

intellectual indolence (and cowardice), but reveals the whole picture, refusing to 
serve up to us the Truth Lite we crave. So:
Both
The Holy Lord said: Renunciation of action and karma yoga both lead to 
the highest happiness; of the two, however, karma yoga is superior to 
renunciation of action (5:2).
Action is rightly renounced when we refrain from an action because it is 
negative, useless, or foolish. Action is also rightly renounced when we act, but in a 

calm and detached manner, wishing only to do the right and not demanding any 
particular result. This, of course, is the yoga of action, karma yoga. Both bring us 
freedom and are superior to merely not acting because we are unsure or afraid and 

merely want to avoid shame and pain, not taking into account the right or wrong of 
the situation. Such a motivation is centered fully in the ego, not the buddhi 
(intelligence).
The inner state
156
He is a constant renouncer of action who neither dislikes nor desires, who 
is indi
"
erent to the pairs of oppositesÐtruly he is easily freed from bondage 
(5:3).
He who neither hates nor desires is free from 
raga
 and 
dwesha
Ðattraction and 
repulsion, both rooted in ego instead of understanding. When we see with the eye 

of the spirit rather than feel with the compulsions of egoism, we neither like nor 
dislike an action, though we do value the doing of our duty. In that perspective our 

detachment will not waver and we will not hesitate to do that which is right to do. 
This is the path to freedom.
In what follows in this chapter we must keep in mind that the simple term 
ÒyogaÓ always means karma yoga.
The way of the wise
ÒSankhya and karma yoga are di
"
erent,Ó the childish declareÐnot the wise. 
If one is practiced correctly, that person Þnds the fruit of both. The realization 
that is attained by the followers of Sankhya is also attained by the followers 

of karma yoga. Sankhya and karma yoga are one. He who perceives this truly 
perceives (5:4-5).
There is an amazing phenomenon that has existed in the world for ages beyond 
calculation. In all religions the teachings of great Masters and scriptures are praised 

and adulatedÐyet hardly ever really followed. These two verses are truly Òhonored 
only in the breachÓ in India where the vast majority insist that the way of 

knowledge is incompatible with the yoga of action. The Gita is chanted there daily 
by tensÐif not hundredsÐof thousands, yet its clear message is assiduously 
disregarded. As I have pointed out before, Adore the Messenger but Ignore the 

Message seems to be the motto of all religion.
Only the ignorant say that jnana is incompatible with karma. What about 
Shankara then? His many works seem to a
!
rm this incompatibility. When 

Shankara speaks of karma he is referring to the karma khanda, the ritualistic part of 
the Vedic tradition, as well as of busyness with ego-inspired action. Krishna is 
speaking of the doing of right action in the right manner, right action being the 

duty, the swadharma of the individual. ÒBetter is oneÕs swadharma, though 
deÞcient, than the swadharma of another well performed. Better is death in oneÕs 
own swadharma; the swadharma of another brings dangerÓ (3:35). Without 

fulÞlling that duty through right action, there can be no spiritual release for anyone.
Knowledge and action are one when action is the manifestation of knowledge. 
An individual may choose to view life more in the aspect of intellectual knowledge 

or in the aspect of duty and right action. The viewpoint may di
"
er, but the actual 
living will be the same whichever view is chosen. That, too, is a matter of the 
natural condition of the aspirantÕs mental energies, and is of no great consequence, 

for moksha (liberation) is the inevitable culmination.
The necessity of both
157
Indeed, renunciation is di
!
cult to attain without karma yoga. The yoga-
yoked sage quickly attains Brahman (5:6).
Sri Ramakrishna often said: ÒThe mind is everything.Ó This is especially seen to 
be true in this part of the Gita. It is not action that is either the problem or the 
solutionÐit is the state of mind, including the attitude and the perspective, that 
determines whether an act is a hindrance or a help toward liberation. It is important 
for us to realize that Krishna is not advocating simple good behavior as a means to 

self-upliftment, but is intent on the psychological condition of the seeker as he 
engages in action. At all times the aspirant must strive to Òsee trueÓ throughout 
daily life; then he can Òlive true.Ó
It is a great error to suppose that Krishna is presenting his teaching as a kind of 
Òlive rightÓ lesson. Rather, he is speaking to Òthe yoga-yoked sage,Ó and to no one 

else, for the state of mind (bhava) he is advocating is impossible to attain by the 

non-yogi.
The prerequisites
Yoga-yoked, with the lower self puriÞed, with the lower self subdued, 
whose senses are conquered, whose Self has become the Self of all beingsÐhe 
is not tainted even when acting (5:7).
When I was reading through the catalog of university courses before my Þrst 
semester, I was continually frustrated because all the courses that really interested 

me had a list of prerequisite courses that had to be taken Þrst. And many of the 

prerequisites did not interest me! Now I am a bit more adult and realize the 
frequent need for prerequisites in all aspects of life, also. Childish people get an 
idea and think they need only jump in, thrash about, and they will achieve what 

they want. This almost never works. Krishna knows this, so he lists to Arjuna the 
things needed to really be a karma yogi. Mere aspiration accomplishes nothing of 
itself.
Yoga-yoked
. The expression in the Sanskrit text is really 
yogayukta
ÐÒunited with 
yoga,Ó one who is irrevocably, inseparably, engaged in the practice of karma yoga.
With the lower self puriÞed
. Good intentions are not enough. There has to be a 
change of heart and mind in the form of puriÞcation. The ordinary Sanskrit word 
for ÒpureÓ is 
shuddha
, but the word used in this verse is 
vishuddha
Ðsupremely pure, 
totally pure. The intriguing thing is that karma yoga is the way to produce these 
prerequisites, and yet can only be practiced when they have already been developed. 
This is the mystery of karma yoga which is obviously itself supernatural.
With the lower self subdued
. Not only the mind, but the body must be puriÞed and 
mastered. Morality is of the essence, for karma yoga is not really a physical process, 

but a mental-spiritual procedure. Physical purity is also essential, especially in the 
matter of diet.
Whose senses are conquered
. The senses must not just be controlled occasionally, 
they must be permanently mastered. This mastery will be relatively easy when the 

heart and body are made pure. Yet, mastery of the senses must not be assumed, for 
158
they have their own petty treacheries. The mind, body, and senses have long been in 
the complete control of the ego and thereby become oriented to its war against the 
Self and its revelation. To conquer them and enlist them on the side of right in the 
form of karma yoga is no easy or simple matter.
Whose self has become the Self of all beings
. Brahman is the Self of all, including the 
individual Self. Therefore when we begin to experience the inÞnite and Þnite Selves, 

we begin to intuit the unity of all things in SpiritÐand therefore our unity with all 

sentient beings.
Not tainted even when acting
. When all these components are in place, karma yoga 
can take place, ensuring that the karma yogi shall not ever be touched by karmic 

reactions on any level.
The karma yogiÕs perspective
How can we be capable of action that produces no e
"
ects on us? It seems 
impossible. But Krishna explains:
ÒI do not do anything;Ó thus thinks the steadfast knower of truth while 
seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, walking, sleeping, breathing, 
speaking, releasing, and holding, opening and closing his eyesÐconvinced that 
it is the senses that move among the sense-objects (5:8-9).
Again and again we encounter the profound uniqueness of the Bhagavad Gita as 
a scripture, even when compared to the Upanishads which it greatly reßects. Here, 

too, we Þnd wisdom that can be found nowhere outside the Gita. We are given a 

description of the continual experience-insight of the illumined individual.
The enlightened knows that any ÒhappeningÓ occurs only to the body, the 
senses, mind or intellectÐthat he is ever, and only, the unacting witness, the 

consciousness that perceives without acting in any manner whatsoever. In the Gita 
we Þnd a clearly-drawn distinction between purusha and prakriti, between the 
conscious witness and the moving energies that are witnessed. Always the perfect 

karma yogi is in this state of 
experiential
 distinctionÐit is not a matter of intellectual 
conception, but of the living fact.
In the third chapter we have already found this summation: ÒIn all situations 
actions are performed by the gunas of Prakriti; those with ego-deluded mind think: 
ÒI am the doer.Ó (3:27)
But he who knows the truth about the gunas and action thinks: ÒThe gunas act 
in the gunas. Thinking thus, he is not attachedÓ (3:28).
O
"
ering
Next Krishna tells us that the enlightened live their life devotionally, saying:
O
"
ering actions to Brahman, having abandoned attachment, he acts 
untainted by evil as a lotus leaf is not wetted by water (5:10).
This is important, Þrst for its practical application, but it also frees us from the 
common idea that the life of the wise, of the jnani, is somehow antiseptic in 
character and devoid of involvement with God in a personal manner. In the Yoga 
159
Sutras it is stated that samadhi, the entry into superconsciousness, is the result of 
IshwarapranidhanaÐo
"
ering the life to God, to Ishwara, the personal aspect of God. 
This is underscored by Krishna saying later on: ÒThose who are ever steadfast, who 
worship me, Þxing their minds on me, endowed with supreme faith, I consider 

them to be the best versed in yogaÓ (12:2).
Not IÐbut them
Krishna puts it all together by simply saying in conclusion:
Karma yogis perform action only with the body, mind, intellect, or the 
senses, forsaking attachment, performing action for self-puriÞcation (5:11).
Self-knowledge is the key to karma yoga as well as its ultimate fruition.
160
Freedom (Moksha)
Those of us born in America were virtually baptized in the word Freedom. But 
freedom means many things, some of them specious in the case of dictatorial 
governments and individuals. Freedom has many levels. Some are satisÞed with the 
freedom to buy whatever color or length of shoelace they want. Others with a 

freedom to do wrong that is not freedom at all but license. According to the 
development of the individual, so will be his concept of freedom and the kind of 
freedom he desires. Krishna speaks to those ready to graduate from earthly 

experience, saying:
He who is steadfast, having abandoned actionÕs fruit, attains lasting peace. 
He who is not steadfast, attached to action based on desire, is bound (5:12).
Those who have established themselves in yoga are immediately freed from the 
law of cause and e
"
ect, of action and reaction. Karma ceases to exist for them. They 

are not compelled to act by past karma, nor do their present actions produce any 

karma that would result in a future compulsion to action. This is true freedom. 
Acting in full awareness of Spirit, they have perfect peace. Although moving within 
this world, the center of their consciousness is in the transcendental realm of 

Inaction.
No matter how spiritually advanced someone may be, until the attainment of 
absolute liberation, until he is irrevocably established in the consciousness of 

Brahman and living ever in the state of Brahmanirvana, like everyone else caught in 
the net of Maya (Delusion), he is bound by actions prompted by desire, no matter 
how subtle or tenuous that bondage, action, or desire might be. But of the 

liberated-in-life, the jivanmukta, Krishna says:
Renouncing all actions with the mind, the embodied one sits happily as 
the ruler of the city of nine gates, not acting at all, nor causing action (5:13).
Centered in the truth of his Self, abiding happily within the nine-gated body, 
such a one may to outward appearance seem to be the most active of men.
The saints
Often we see that the saints accomplish much more than ordinary people. One 
of the few books Yogananda read in the West and which he recommended to his 
students, was 
The Saints That Moved the World
. Not only that, their inßuence on 
others may last through centuries, maintaining and ever-increasing the works they 

began in their lifetime. This is only natural for, being one with God, they possess 

his creative powers and abundance. Consider the present-day ÒkingdomsÓ of 
Krishna, of Buddha, and of Jesus within the hearts of human beings.
We admire, even revere, many great men and women of our human history, but 
the majority of them are only memories. In contrast, the saints and masters are 

living presences; the very thought of them brings us into subtle contact with them, 
161
awakening our inner consciousness, inwardly drawing us toward the higher levels 
of existence in which they dwell. The mere sight of their forms produces a positive 
change in our consciousnessÐat least in the consciousness of those who are willing 
to be changed. Moreover, any action we do in response to their inßuence on us will 

not create karma for us. If we act in conformity with their teachings and as a result 
of their inspiration, that action will liberate rather than bind us.
The source of delusion
Now Krishna introduces a major topic: the source of delusion. It is interesting 
how psychopathic people can become when confronted with their folly and evil. 
They blame anyone and anything for their error. Everybody is a factor in the 
situation but them. In Genesis we see how Eve blamed the serpent and Adam 
blamed not only Eve but hinted that God was responsible (Genesis 3:9-13). ÒWhy 

does God do this?É Why does God allow this?Ó is a common protest. Few are 
those who understand that they, and they alone, bear the responsibility for their 
actions and their reactions. But now in this Þfth chapter of the Gita the liberating 

truth is being given to us.
The Lord does not create either means of action or action itself in this 
world, nor the union of action with its fruit. On the other hand, the swabhava 

impels one to action (5:14).
PrabhavanandaÕs interpretive translation says it quite well, even if not literally: 
ÒDo not say: ÔGod gave us this delusion.Õ You dream you are the doer, you dream 

that action is done, you dream that action bears fruit. It is your ignorance, it is the 
worldÕs delusion that gives you these dreams.Ó Saint James spoke of the same 
situation, saying: ÒLet no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for 

God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man: But every man is 
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust hath 
conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is Þnished, bringeth forth 

deathÓ (James 1:13-15).
The truly comforting part of PrabhavanandaÕs version is the word Òdream.Ó All 
relative existence is a dream. We are co-dreamers with God. God dreams the 

cosmos, and we dream our involvement within it. No matter how horrendous or 
magniÞcent the dream may be, at the moment of awakening it will be revealed as 
nothing but ideasÐcreative ideas, but still just ideas. Only the two realitiesÐGod and 

the spiritÐwill remain. Blessed cessation, blessed peace and freedom. So when 
confronting the truth about delusion we need not be horriÞed or devastated by the 
fact that it comes from us. After all, even God dreamsÐwhy not us? God dreams 

rightly, but we dream wrongly. First we correct our dreaming, begin dreaming 
rightly along with God, and then we awaken. No more dream, no more delusion. 
Only Truth.
The primary focus of the Bhagavad Gita is Karma Yoga, the Yoga of Action. Yet 
Krishna tells us that the whole things is a dream, a product of ignorance. Even so, 

the dream is of importance, because through this dreaming we develop and expand 
162
our consciousness. The dream is not worthless and is certainly not evil or wrong. It 
is our loss of control and the resulting confusion and bondage that is wrong. The 
correct perspective on this is necessary for our controlling the dream and enabling 
ourselves to awaken from it.
If we ingest hallucinogenics we will have hallucinations. If we abstain, they will 
not occur. If we ÒingestÓ the world and come to think we are part of it, we will only 

dream more and more, each dream becoming more distorted and misery-producing. 

When we draw back into our pure consciousness and begin to live in abstinence 
from the hallucinogenic of the world, we will begin to see through the veil into the 
Reality behind it. Eventually the veil melts away and we Þnd ourselves face-to-face 

with the Real. Until then we are the source of the trouble.
Swabhava
This truth is expressed even more clearly by the inclusion of the word swabhava 
(self-nature), the real actor or mover in all this.
It is very comfortable for most translators to use the word ÒnatureÓ with a 
capital N. They are children of Adam, throwing the blame on the creation, and 
therefore on the creator. The word swabhava does not mean prakriti, but the 
inherent disposition, nature, or potentiality of each one of us, our inherent state of 

mind, our state of inner being. An apple tree bears apples and a grapevine bears 
grapes. It is a matter of manifesting the inner nature, the swabhava of the plant.
Our entire life is a manifestation of our swabhava. This is unsettling if our life is 
unsatisfactory or overtly negative. We pity ourselves and enlist the sympathy of 

others, but it is our inner nature that is being revealed by the outer. You may not be 
able to judge a book by its cover, but you can certainly judge it by its contents. So it 

is with our life. That is its purpose: to reveal the character and quality of our inner 
condition through outward appearances. We should read the message and learn. 
Otherwise there is no alleviation from life to life. We are the problem and we are 

the solution.
Since our swabhava is the root of the dilemma, Patanjali says that a necessary 
practice for the yogi is swadhyayaÐself-study, self-analysis. Only if we come to know 

the truth about our inner nature will we be able to intelligently work on it. We 
must Þrst know the facts about our false self before we can uncover and know our 
true Self.
Divine indi
"
erence
It is embarrassing and painful to see and acknowledge our faults and wrongs, 
but Krishna helps us in that department, also.
The Omnipresent takes note of neither demerit nor merit. Knowledge is 
enveloped by ignorance; as a result of that people are deluded (5:15).
Obviously a perfect being cannot be shaken from his perfect equilibrium. Just as 
a human being could hardly be upset or angered at the action of an ant many feet 
down in the earth, neither can God be a
"
ected by the deeds of anyone. After all, 
163
God has manifested this universe for the purpose of our acting therein and learning 
the way of right action and to freedom from action. Consequently, whatever we do 
is for our interest only. As Krishna will say later in the Gita: ÒI am the same to all 
beings. There is none disliked or dear to meÓ (9:29)
It is we who must become concerned over the question of sin and virtueÐand for 
the right reason: liberation. What has God to do with it? What is our dream to him? 

We are dreaming because the Light that is our Self is covered by our ignorance in 

the form of a self-perpetuating dream. The wise know that human beings choose to 
be either self-deluded or self-illumined.
The end of darkness/ignorance
But those in whom this ignorance of the Self has been destroyed by 
knowledgeÐthat knowledge of theirs, like the sun, reveals the Supreme 
Brahman (5:16).
The Self and Brahman being one, when the Self is revealed so also is Brahman 
revealedÐnot outside us as an object, but from within us as the Source of our very 

existence. To Þnd God, then, we must look within. As Saint Nectarios of Aegina, a 
twentieth-century Greek Orthodox saint, said: ÒIf you cannot Þnd God in your heart 
you will never Þnd him.Ó As Krishna continues:
Those whose minds are absorbed in That, whose Selves are Þxed on That, 
whose foundation is That, who hold That as the highest object, whose evils 

have been shaken o
"
 by knowledge, attain the ending of rebirth (5:17).
164
The Brahman-Knower
Seeing the One in all
Brahman is the origin of all, hence Krishna has this to say about the way the 
enlightened views all around him:
The wise see the same Self in a wise and disciplined Brahmin, in a cow, in 
an elephant, in a dog, even in an eater of dogs (5:18).
Most of the dogs in India are wild animals related to jackals and hyenas, and 
many of them are terribly diseased. They often travel in packs, even in the cities, 
and have been known to pull down, kill and eat a child. I was threatened by a pack 
of about thirty dogs right in Varanasi. They were rushing at me, but knowing that 
bullies are cowards, I picked up a big brick and made a throwing motion with it, 

and they ran back. But I got out of there immediately!
There are ashrams in India where they pretend to embody this verse. They feed 
and fawn over the mangy street dogs (or the purebred dog of the guru) and say: 

ÒGod is Dog. Dog is God.Ó But an interesting thing can be observed: they show no 
such respect to Brahmins, and certainly not to poor and ÒcommonÓ Indians. 
Apparently they follow George Orwell: all may be equal, but some are more equal 

than others. Sometimes the cows get almostÐbut not quiteÐthe same respect as the 
dogs. Such is lifeÐand delusion.
The capacity to see the unity that is the truth behind all diversity, is unique to 
the enlightened. However much the unenlightened may verbally a
!
rm unity, the 

pressure of life-experience dispels it like a mirage. Truth is only truth when it is 
realized
.
The enlightened person is aware of diversity even though he perceives the 
underlying unity. And this is the crux of the matter: Unity is the underlying reality, 

but on the surface di
"
erentiation must be both seen and reacted to accordingly. For 

example, proper food and poison may be metaphysically the same, but the 
enlightened eat one and avoid the other. As long as we are in the world we must act 
to some extent as though it is real, just as in a dream we have to follow the rules 

even though we know we are dreaming. For example, we cannot walk through a 
dream wall, but must use a dream door. Sri Ramakrishna spoke of the unripe 
understanding of non-duality that can get us into di
!
culties. Here is the story he 

told regarding it: 
ÒIn a certain forest lived a holy man who had many disciples. Once he taught the 
disciples that they should bow down to all recognizing that God dwells in all 

beings. One day one of the disciples went to the forest to bring Þrewood for the 
sacriÞcial Þre. All of a sudden there was an outcry, ÔRun, run all, wherever you are! 
A mad elephant is passing!Õ Everybody ran, but the disciple did not ßee. He knew 

that the elephant was also God. So he thought, ÔWhy should I run away?Õ So 
thinking he stood still and began to sing praises, bowing before the animal. The 
165
mahout on the elephant was, however, shouting, ÔRun, run!Õ The disciple still did 
not move. Finally the elephant came and lifting him up with its trunk threw him on 
one side and left. The disciple was heavily bruised and lay unconscious on the 
ground.
ÒHearing what had happened, his teacher and the other disciples came and 
carried him to the ashram. He was given medicine. Upon his regaining 

consciousness sometime later some one asked him, ÔWhy did you not run away 

after hearing that the elephant was coming?Õ He said, ÔThe teacher had told me that 
God himself had become all these men, animals and the rest. That is why I did not 
move away, seeing that it was only God who was coming as an elephant.Õ The 

teacher then said, ÔYes, my child, it is true that the elephant God was coming, but 
the mahout God did warn you. Since all are God, why did you not pay heed to his 
words? One should also listen to the words of the mahout God.ÕÓ
A serial killer and a saint are fundamentally the same, but our conduct in 
relation to them had better be based on their di
"
erence.
Living in Brahman
Even here on earth rebirth is conquered by those whose mind is 
established in evenness. Brahman is without fault and the same to all; 
therefore they are established in Brahman (5:19).
Compulsory rebirth is conquered by the sage whose mind abides ever in the 
perfection of the Self and Brahman. Having gained the highest knowledge, he has 

no more need for rebirth. If he returns it will be to help others as he has been 
helped.
One should not exult when encountering what is liked, and one should not 
be repulsed when encountering the disliked. With Þrm intellect, undeluded, 

the knower of Brahman is established in Brahman (5:20).
This is because he knows that the pleasant and the unpleasant are both mere 
dreams, that the joy he experiences in his oneness with Brahman is the only real 

experience. Therefore:
He whose Self is unattached to external contacts, who Þnds happiness in 
the Self, whose Self is united to Brahman by yoga, reaches imperishable 

happiness (5:21).
Beware
Truly, pleasures born of contact with the senses are wombs of pain, since 
they have a beginning and an end. The wise man is not satisÞed with them 
(5:22).
This is a very easy concept to grasp and a tremendously hard one to follow 
unwaveringlyÐsuch is our conditioning from millions (if not billions) of lives in 

which the senses have dominated our consciousness and blinded us to the Self. It 
would be wise to disregard the pleasures of the senses from the fact they are 
ßeeting, and the truth that they will inevitably result in pain (dukha). That should 
166
seal our certainty that avoidance of such things is only good sense. Yet, as the camel 
chews the thorns, cutting and bloodying its lips, refusing to give up its pain-bearing 
enjoyment, so it is with us until we truly do Òget a gripÓ and refuse any future folly. 
For this reason: 
He who is able to endure here on earth, before liberation from the body, 
the agitation that arises from desire and anger, is steadfast, a happy man 

(5:23).
Mastery is the needed factor, for control is necessary for the requisite 
development of our will. Although we like the idea that everything falls into place 

automatically, the truth is we will have to get our hands dirtyÐand blisteredÐby good 

old-fashioned e
"
ort. As a professor in a major British university once told his class 
on the Þrst day of the term: ÒIn this course you will have to acquaint and accustom 
yourself to a venerable old four-letter Anglo-Saxon word: 
Work
.Ó No glory without 
gore.
The inner orientation
He whose happiness is within, whose delight is within, whose illumination 
is within: that yogi, identical in being with Brahman, attains Brahmanirvana 
(5:24).
Over and over we need to keep reminding ourselves of this principle, for no 
matter how spiritual we may consider ourselves to be, we are so habituated to 

externalityÐoften in the form of dogmas and religious observancesÐthat we easily 

fall into the trap of materiality masquerading as spirituality. Continually we must 
check to see that our entire thought and life is oriented toward the inner kingdom 
of Spirit. Especially our meditation must be inward, ever inward, and so must be 

the focus of our awareness outside meditation. Only inward joy, inward peace, and 
inward vision Þts us for the liberation of Nirvana.
The traits of liberation
Krishna now enumerates the traits of those who have entered Nirvana.
The seers whose evils have been annihilated, whose doubts have been 
dispelled, whose inner being is mastered, who rejoice in the welfare of all 
beings, attain Brahmanirvana (5:25).
Each thing listed here is easy to comprehend, but it is worth pointing out that 
the knowers of Brahman do not become abstracted or self-absorbed, unaware of the 

terrible su
"
ering in the world. Just the opposite. They are Þlled with compassion 
and do what their inner guidance shows them to help those around them. In India 

the words saint and philanthropist are synonyms. My beloved friend Swami 
Sivananda of Rishikesh dedicated his entire life to the welfare of others. As his 
disciple Swami Chidananda has said, his every waking thought was how to beneÞt 

others. Daily I witnessed his abounding love toward everyoneÐnot a theoretical 
love, but one which continually manifested in concrete ways. This is no 
exaggeration, as those who met him know. In Sivananda I saw every virtue lived to 
167
the maximum degree, but his loving mercy was the most evident. He was a perfect 
illustration of the next verse:
Released from desire and anger, with thoughts controlled, those ascetics 
who know the Self Þnd very near to them the bliss of Brahmanirvana (5:26).
How it is done
This is all very Þne, but how will we manage to reach such an exalted state? 
Krishna tells us:
Excluding outside contacts, turning up the eyes toward the two brows, 
equalizing the inhalation and exhalation moving within the nostrils, (5:27).
Earlier (4:29) I described the circling of the breath. That is what is meant here 
by equalizing the inhalation and exhalation of the breath. Krishna advises to do this 
with the eyes turned upward Òtoward the two brows.Ó This is not focusing the gaze 

between the eyebrows as is often thought. That would strain the eyes. Once in the 
holy city of Naimasharanya I asked Sri Ma Anandamayi about certain aspects of 
meditation. She very forcefully told me that I must never focus the gaze between 

the eyebrows as that will strain and may even damage the eyes. Krishna wants us to 
simply look up as though looking toward a distant point. This is very helpful to 
cultivate awareness of the sahasrara chakra, the thousand petalled lotus in the head. 

But there must be no strain. (Sometimes the yogi will Þnd his eyes naturally drawn 
upward, even with some intensity, but when it is spontaneous there is no 
detriment.)
The result
With his senses, mind and intellect controlled, with liberation as his 
highest aim, free from desire, fear, and anger: such a one is forever free. 
Having known me, the enjoyer of the tapasyas o
"
ered as sacriÞce, the mighty 
Lord of all the world and the friend of all creatures, he attains peace (5:28, 

29).
Not only is God the goal, he is also Òthe enjoyer of the tapasyas o
"
ered as 
sacriÞceÓ engaged in on the way. Whoever engages in spiritual practice is already in 

touch with God, for it is God who makes us able to pursue spiritual life. God is not 
waiting for us at the end of the road, he is within us, walking the road along with 
us. For he is Òthe friend of all creatures.Ó 
Suhridam sarvabhutanam
 also means Òthe 
companion of all beings,Ó for God is seated in the hearts of all beings, living their 
lives along with them as the eternal witness. ÒI am the Self abiding in the heart of 
all beings; I am the beginning, the middle, and the end of all beings as 

wellÓ (10:20). ÒThe Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing them by his 
maya to revolve as if mounted on a machineÓ (18:61).
How could we help but enter the peace of his presence, since that presence is 
ever within us?
168
The Goal of Karma Yoga
For some inexplicable reason, throughout the ages in both East and West the 
idea has prevailed that spiritual people do not engage in practical matters, that to 
really be spiritual is to be incapable of skill or e
!
ciency in any kind of material 
activity, or even in the maintenance of material objects. Some years ago we had a 

phonograph record of religious music whose cover was a hazy photograph of a 
monk holding a rosary and looking at it blankly (contemplatively?). One of our 
members pointed to it and said: ÒBefore I came to the monastery I thought that was 

what monastic life was like.Ó Both members and visitors have expressed to me how 
surprised they were that in the monastery we actually work instead of sitting 
around talking profound philosophy. But Sri Ramakrishna, speaking of this kind of 

misunderstanding, used to say: ÒIf you can weigh salt, you can weigh sugar,Ó 
meaning that a person competent in spiritual life will be competent in material lifeÐ
and often the other way round, though not always.
The idea that spiritual people are ßu
"
-headed drones sitting around wondering 
where their next mystical experience is coming from is absurd. Whether this silly 

image comes from lazy monastics and fake mystics or from those who hope 

spiritual people will be too stupid or impractical to see through them and their 
material ways, I have no idea, but it has been around much too long and accepted 
by people much too intelligent to believe such mythology. That nonsense was 

around in KrishnaÕs time, so he addresses it in this sixth chapter of the Gita.
Yogi and monk (renouncer)
The Holy Lord said: He who performs that action which is his duty, not 
caring for the actionÕs fruit, is a renouncer and a yogi, not he without 
sacriÞcial Þre and sacred rites (6:1).
First, a bit of Sanskrit. Sannyasa means renunciation, and in modern times is 
applied to monastic life. It literally means Òtotal casting aside.Ó A sannyasi(n) is a 

renunciate, a monk, who has totally cast aside all that which would bind him. It is 

not the negative rejection or giving up that characterizes monastic life or 
renunciation in the West. Rather it is a freeing of oneself from the ties that bind. 
The Hindu monk does not consider that he has sacriÞced or denied himself 

anything. Rather, he considers that he has freed himself from that which would 
hinder his Self-realization. It is a joyful, liberating thing.
In his autobiography, Paramhansa Yogananda tells of a great saint, Nagendranath 
Bhaduri, and gives the following telling incident:
ÒÔMaster, you are wonderful!Õ A student, taking his leave, gazed ardently at the 
patriarchal sage. ÔYou have renounced riches and comforts to seek God and teach us 
wisdom!Õ It was well-known that Bhaduri Mahasaya had forsaken great family 
wealth in his early childhood, when single-mindedly he entered the yogic path. 
169
ÒÔYou are reversing the case!Õ The saintÕs face held a mild rebuke. ÔI have left a 
few paltry rupees, a few petty pleasures, for a cosmic empire of endless bliss. How 
then have I denied myself anything? I know the joy of sharing the treasure. Is that a 
sacriÞce? The shortsighted worldly folk are verily the real renunciates! They 

relinquish an unparalleled divine possession for a poor handful of earthly toys!Õ
ÒI chuckled over this paradoxical view of renunciationÐone which puts the cap of 
Croesus on any saintly beggar, whilst transforming all proud millionaires into 

unconscious martyrs.Ó
Krishna is using sannyasa and sannyasi in the pure sense of a renouncer, 
whether monastic or non-monastic, pointing us to the interior disposition that is 

absolutely essential, whatever our external situation. Being a yogi, a sannyasi, is a 
matter of that disposition, of the right intention, in all moments of our life. Simply 
doing nothing is neither yoga nor sannyasa. This does not mean that the solitary or 

enclosed life is invalid, for the true hermit or world-renouncer is intensely active 
inwardly and necessarily active outwardly at least minimally for the simple 
subsistence of his life.
That which they call renunciation, know that to be yoga. Without 
renouncing selÞsh purpose no one whatever becomes a yogi (6:2).
There we have it. The yogi must be a sannyasi and the sannyasi must be a yogi.
The yogiÕs path
For the sage desirous of attaining yoga, action is said to be the means. For 
him who has already attained yoga, tranquility is said to be the means (6:3).
Karma yoga is necessary for the aspiring yogi, for the same positive kind of 
detachment and inner calm essential for karma yoga is also needed for proÞciency 

in meditation. The fact is, karma yoga trains us for meditation and meditation trains 
us for karma yoga. In essence they are the same thing, for both are psychological in 
character.
When he is truly attached neither to sense objects nor to actions, and has 
renounced all purpose (sarva sankalpa), then he is said to have attained yoga 

(6:4).
Sarva sankalpa sannyasi
ÐÒhaving cast aside all sankalpa.Ó Sankalpa is a strong 
exercising, or resolution, of the will based on some desire. So here, too, we see that 

desire is the serpent beneath the rose, the root of the whole trouble, whatever form 

it takes.
170
Getting There
While we exist in relativity there are two selves, the lower and the higher. The 
higher is the true Self, and the lower is the pretend self, which is nevertheless 
necessary at this moment for our evolution. Until the real Self masters the lower 
self they are in continual conßict with one another, often on a subconscious level. 

Krishna is now going to talk about this. He will use only a single word, Atman, but 
will mean it in these two virtually antithetical selves. By using small and large ÒsÓ 
we can convey the idea. However, translators do not agree as to which self is meant 

at the various times the word is used. So I am going to give the translation without 
capitalization and then analyze it in both ways.
One should uplift oneself by the lower self; one should not degrade 
oneself. The lower self can truly be a friend of the lower self, and the lower 

self alone can be an enemy of the lower self. For him who has conquered 
himself by the lower self, the lower self is a friend. But for him who has not 

conquered himself, the lower self remains hostile, like an enemy (6:5-6).
The lesser aspects of our being, our lower self, are not negative by their nature, 
but ignorance and misapplication of will have corrupted them and reversed their 

polarity. The Þrst step, then, for the aspiring yogi is their puriÞcation, correction 
and repolarization. This is accomplished in the very Þrst step of PatanjaliÕs eightfold 
yoga: yama and niyama.
Prerequisites for yoga
ÒYoga is for the purpose of knowledge of truth,Ó says Shankara. Knowledge 
(jnana) does not come about from practice of yoga methods alone. Perfection in 
knowledge is in fact only for those who practice virtue (dharma) as well as yoga.
All things rest upon something elseÐthat is, all things are supported by another. 
This is because a foundation is needed for anything to exist. Being Himself the 

Ultimate Support of all things, God alone is free from this necessity. Yoga, then, 
also requires support. As Trevor Leggett says in his introduction to ShankaraÕs 

commentary on the Yoga Sutras: ÒThis is yoga presented for the man of the world, 
who must Þrst clear, and then steady, his mind against the fury of illusory passions, 
and free his life from entanglements.Ó Patanjali very carefully and fully outlines the 

elements of the support needed by the aspirant, giving invaluable information on 
how to guarantee success in yoga.
The Þrst Yoga Sutra says: Ò
Now
 the exposition of yoga,Ó implying that there 
must be something leading up to yoga in the form of necessary developments of 

consciousness and personality. These prerequisites are known as Yama and Niyama. 
Shankara says quite forcefully that Òfollowing yama and niyama is the basic 

qualiÞcation to practice yoga.Ó
171
Yama and Niyama
Yama and Niyama are often called the Ten Commandments of Yoga, but they 
have nothing to do with the ideas of sin and virtue or good and evil as dictated by 
some cosmic potentate. Rather they are determined by a thoroughly practical, 

pragmatic basis: that which strengthens and facilitates our yoga practice should be 
observed and that which weakens or hinders it should be avoided. It is not a matter 
of being good or bad, but of being wise or foolish. Each one of these Five DonÕts 

(Yama) and Five DoÕs (Niyama) is a supporting, liberating foundation of Yoga.
Yama means self-restraint in the sense of self-mastery, or abstention, and 
consists of Þve elements. Niyama means observances, of which there are also Þve. 

Here is the complete list of these ten elements of successful yoga as given in Yoga 
Sutras 2:30, 32:
1) Ahimsa: non-violence, non-injury, harmlessness

2) Satya: truthfulness, honesty
3) Asteya: non-stealing, honesty, non-misappropriativeness

4) Brahmacharya: sexual continence in thought, word and deed as well as 
control of all the senses
5) Aparigraha: non-possessiveness, non-greed, non-selÞshness, non-
acquisitiveness
6) Shaucha: purity, cleanliness

7) Santosha: contentment, peacefulness

8) Tapas: austerity, practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline
9) Swadhyaya: introspective self-study, spiritual study
10) Ishwarapranidhana: o
"
ering of oneÕs life to God
All of these deal with the innate powers of the human beingÐor rather with the 
abstinence and observance that will develop and release those powers to be used 
toward our spiritual perfection, to our self-realization and liberation. Shankara says 
quite forcefully that Òfollowing yama and niyama is the basic qualiÞcation to 
practice yoga. The qualiÞcation is not simply that one wants to practice yoga. So 

yama and niyama are methods of yogaÓ in themselves and are not mere adjuncts or 
aids that can be optional.
But at the same time, the practice of yoga helps the aspiring yogi to follow the 
necessary ways of yama and niyama, so he should not be discouraged from taking 

up yoga right now. He should determinedly embark on yama, niyama, and yoga 
simultaneously. Success will be his.
Only through establishment in yama and niyama can anyone Òuplift oneself by 
the lower self.Ó If yama and niyama are not observed then there is no other result 

than that the person shall continue to degrade himself. By yama and niyama Òthe 

lower self can truly be a friend of the lower self,Ó which before was its enemy. The 
diligent yogi makes the lower self his friend, but if he lapses in yama and niyama 
the lower self reverts to being his enemy.
172
Tranquility
The highest self of him who has conquered himself and is peaceful, is thus 
steadfast in cold, heat, pleasure, pain, honor and dishonor (6:7).
Peace is a matter of the exercise of will. Never will our life be free from the pairs 
of opposites, from ups and downs and changes of all kinds, pleasant and 
unpleasant, if the will is not strong and operative. If the will is in peace, in the Self, 
then the sadhaka will be in peace. This is a very high and subtle state, and many 

think they have attained it merely because they have developed a kind of Stoic 
numbness in relation to their life. (This prevails in India.) But this is not so.
The serenity spoken of by Krishna comes from identiÞcation with the immutable 
Self. Two examples of this in modern times are Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh and 

Swami Ramdas of Anandashram. They were often seen to be happy and peaceful in 
adversity and good fortune, and especially in honor and dishonor. Swami RamdasÕ 

autobiography, 
In the Vision of God
, illustrates this many times.
Supreme peace
The yogi who is satisÞed with knowledge and discrimination, unchanging, 
with senses conquered, to whom a lump of clay, a stone and gold are the 
same, steadfastÐis said to be in union (yukta) (6:8).
The human race is gripped in the delusion that if a thing looks like something, 
then it is that. Even worse: that if someone acts like they are in a certain state, they 

have that state. I vividly remember seeing Alan Watts pretending (very poorly) to be 

in the state of satori (enlightenment) as he rubbed away on an ink slab (!?). At that 
very moment he was an alcoholicÐnot a state or action produced by enlightenment. 
People think that if they act kindly then they are kind, if they act generously they 

are generous, and if they act like aristocracy they are aristocracy. Not so.
Swami Sivananda cleared up the whole question by four little words he formed 
into a motto that he even had printed on pencils: BE GOOD. DO GOOD. 

Throughout every morning at satsang with him in the Diamond Jubilee Hall, right 
behind him above the door which we had all entered, we saw those words in huge 
letters. First we must 
be
; then we can 
do
.
We do not have measles because we have red spots on our skin; rather, we have 
red spots on our skin because we have measles. This is incredibly simple, but few 

people, especially in the West, grasp the nature of cause and e
"
ect. They continually 

get cause and e
"
ect reversed, thinking an e
"
ect can become a cause. ÒIf I act like it, 
then I will become it.Ó This is philosophically translated into the absurdities of 
Positive Thinking. ÒIf we just hold that good thought it will come aboutÉ We will 

just know that everything will be all right.ÉÓ and other nonsensical platitudes. 
Thoughts may be things, but things are not inner states. ÒSatisÞed with knowledge 
and discrimination,É steadfast in yoga,Ó are absolute requisites.
When Brahman is experienced, then the ßuctuations of the senses are no more 
than driftwood on the vast ocean of Spirit. All that which men prize and despise are 
173
both seen as the same: dreams. Sri Ramakrishna tested his mind by holding a lump 
of clay in one hand and a rupee in the other. Saying: ÒRupee is clay and clay is 
rupee, clay is truly rupee and rupee is truly clay,Ó he tossed them into the Ganges, 
a
!
rming their samenessÐfor all things must in the end merge into Brahman.
He is preeminent among men who is impartial to friend, associate and 
enemy, neutral among enemies and kinsmen, impartial also among the 

righteous and the unrighteous (6:9).
For he sees all 
in
 Brahman 
as
 Brahman.
174
The YogiÕs Retreat
The yogi in the world
Krishna has told Arjuna that a yogi can attain perfection here in this world, even 
while fulÞlling his earthly responsibilities. In the third chapter he said:
ÒTherefore, constantly unattached perform that which is your duty. Indeed by 
unattached action man attains the Supreme. Indeed, perfection was attained 
through action alone by King Janaka and others. For the maintenance of the world, 
as an example you should act.
ÒWhatever the best of men doesÐthis and thatÐthus other men do; whatever the 
standard that he setsÐthat is what the world shall follow. I have no duty whatsoever 

in the three worlds, nor anything that must be attained, nevertheless I engage in 

action. Indeed, if I did not tirelessly engage at all in action, then mankind 
everywhere would follow my example [
literally:
 path or way]. If I did not perform 
action these worlds would perish, and I would be the cause of confusion: I would 

destroy these people.
ÒAs the unwise act, attached to action, so the wise should act, unattached, 
intending to maintain the welfare of the world. One should not unsettle the minds 

of the ignorant attached to action; the wise should cause them to enjoy all actionsÐ
[himself] engaged in their performanceÓ (3:19-26)
Those who pretend to the ideals of yoga while really loving the world and its 
toys, exuberantly put forth the image of the worldly-wise and debonair yogi, busily 

rushing around like a squirrel, gathering and storing the nuts of material success 
and enjoyment Òwhile yet Þnding time to meditate.Ó They picture a Òbalanced life of 

yoga and actionÓ that shows an overwhelming involvement in action and very little 
in yoga. (After all, a day in a truly balanced life would consist of eight hours spent 
in sleep, eight hours spent in work, and eight hours spent in meditation.)
I know of many ÒbalancedÓ yogis that can barely meditate for an hour even after 
decades of meditation practice. When they do ÒmeditateÓ for longer periods of time, 

they spend a lot of it in chanting and listening (with closed eyes) to inspiration in 

the form of sermonettes. Many of them cannot sit for meditation in silence, but 
must have some kind of music or mantra recording going all the time. I do not say 
this to disparage themÐit is not their fault that their yoga methods and their 

teachers are duds. But I do think that after some years they might Þgure those facts 
out and start looking for something better. For it is there. They can Þnd it in the 
Gita and have no less a teacher than the avatar Krishna and the recorder of his 

teachings, Vyasa.
The yogiÕs retreat
There is no doubt that the yogi may have to work among the noise of urban 
business, that telephone and computer may be ringing, buzzing, and beeping, and 
175
people be talking, talking and talking throughout the day. But when the work time 
is over it should really be over and the guidelines given by Krishna should be 
adhered to as much as possible. Here they are:
The yogi should Þx his awareness constantly on the Self, remaining in 
solitude, alone, with controlled mind and lower self, without desires or 

possessiveness (6:10).
The yogi should Þx his awareness constantly on the Self. 
Unless this is done, what value 
do the other observances have? No one can sit in meditation twenty-four hours a 

day, but through constant awareness produced by japa outside meditation he can 
unceasingly Þx his mind on the Self every waking moment of his life. In the 

thirteenth chapter Krishna will speak of the ideal yogi as having Òunswerving 
devotion to me with single-minded yoga, frequenting secluded places, [having] 
distaste for the society of menÓ (13:10).
Remaining in solitude
. This can be done in two ways. You can live in a quiet place 
where after your daily work you can go and be by yourself, where the world can be 

shut out and forgotten about. If the place is in a solitary location away from town or 

neighbors, that is best, but any place where you can shut and lock the door and be 
alone is su
!
cient, if it is quiet and free from noises of the world and the worldly. 
Even if you have to move occasionally to ensure this, you will be glad you did.
In the thirteenth chapter of 
Autobiography of a Yogi
, the master yogi, Ram Gopal 
Muzumdar, asked Yogananda: ÒAre you able to have a little room where you can 

close the door and be alone?Ó When he said that he did, the saint told him: ÒThat is 

your cave. That is your sacred mountain. That is where you will Þnd the kingdom of 
God.Ó This is really important for the unmarried yogi unless he can Þnd other yogis 
(of the same sex) who will live with him in a quiet place and keep to themselves, 

out of sight and sound.
Occasionally you should go away even from your home and live in solitudeÐnot 
in some busy ashram where you will do Òkarma yogaÓ and take part in ÒspiritualÓ 

group activities. It is better to stay at home than waste your time in this way. 
Instead, you should Þnd a place where you can really be all to yourself. If you can 
prepare your food and eat in solitude, this is good, but if you can go somewhere for 

(vegetarian) meals where you need speak to no one socially and can immediately go 
back to your place, that is also good, though not as good. A truly quiet hotel that 
has room service can be perfectly acceptable, but if you can be alone in some kind of 

house, cabin or room, it is better.
Sri Ramakrishna had this to say about such solitude:

ÒIt is very necessary now and then to retire into solitude and think of him. In 
the beginning it is very di
!
cult to keep the mind on God without retiring into 
solitude.
ÒWhen a plant is young it is necessary to put a fence round it. Without a fence it 
is eaten up by goats and cows. To meditate you should withdraw yourself within or 

retire to a secluded spot or into the forest and always discriminate between the real 
and the unreal. God alone is truth; namely, the reality, and all the rest is unreal and 
176
transitory. Discriminating in this manner renounce the transient things from the 
mind.É
ÒKeshab Sen, Pratap and others told me, ÔSir, ours is the view of King Janaka.Õ I 
said, ÔOne doesnÕt become King Janaka by mere words of mouth. King Janaka Þrst 

performed so many austerities in solitude. Do something Þrst. Then only you may 
become King Janaka.ÕÉ
ÒAnd notice also that this very mind acquires knowledge, dispassion and 
devotion by dwelling on God in solitude.É The world is water and the mind is like 

milk. If you pour milk into water they get mixed and you cannot Þnd pure milk 
anymore. If you churn butter after turning milk into curd and put it in water it will 

ßoat. So Þrst churn the butter of knowledge and devotion by following spiritual 
practices in solitude. That butter will never mix. Even if you put it in the water of 
the world it will ßoat.Ó
Sri Mahendranath Gupta, known as ÒM,Ó was a disciple of Sri Ramakrishna and 
the recorder of these words in 
The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
. In YoganandaÕs 
autobiography he is called ÒMaster Mahashaya, the blissful devotee.Ó He followed 

these words of Sri Ramakrishna all his life. He had several isolated places right in 
Calcutta, known only to himself, where he would go for days at a time to practice 
meditation. On occasion he would come home for meals and then go back to his 

secret haven. At other times he left Calcutta for a solitary ashram owned by him.
Both forms of solitudeÐat home and awayÐare necessary for the yogi.

Alone
. If the yogi is married, still it is important to spend time by oneself each 
day. This is not impossible. I have an Indian friend whose mother is a great 
tapaswin. Though living in a joint family, occasionally she retires to a quiet room in 
the back of the house and stays there for days, weeks, and even months, seeing no 

one and having her food put outside her door. During these periods, if for some 
reason she comes into another part of the house everyone knows she is coming 
because a strong fragrance of roses precedes her, and if she speaks it is as though 

she is spraying rose essence into the air. I know other yogis in India and America, 
both men and women, who have private areas in their home for their sadhana. One 
friend even has a secret room she alone knows how to get into. Another has a small 

temple behind his house.
The important thing is to be alone in your mind. When you are in your Òholy 
placeÓ let no one interrupt you or call out to you or communicate with you in any 

way. During my Þrst trip to India, in the ashram of Anandamayi Ma I met an 
astonishing man, Doctor Pannalal. Someone told me that he had at one time been 
the governor of Benares and lived in a palace. Behind the palace he had a small hut 

(kutir) built for meditation. He gave strict orders to everyone that he was never to 
be disturbed when he was in there. But one day the palace caught Þre, so someone 
ran and banged on the door, shouting that the palace was burning. ÒI donÕt care. 

Leave me alone!Ó he called back. This was repeated some more timesÐalways with 
the same response. After some hours he came out of the hut and found the palace a 
heap of ash and rubble. Walking over to where his family, sta
"
, and onlookers were 
177
standing, he calmly observed: ÒIt looks like we need to build a new one.Ó That was 
all.
And by the way, wherever you are, do not overdo Òsatsang.Ó Occasional company 
with other yogis is beneÞcial if only spiritual subjects are spoken of, but let it be no 

more than once or twice a week, unless you are living with other yogis and want a 
daily satsang.
With controlled mind and [lower] self
. I think you will Þnd that solitude will help 
tremendously in mastering body and mind. However, yama, niyama, meditation and 

proper vegetarian diet are absolute essentials of such control. You will also Þnd that 
spiritual reading has a very beneÞcial e
"
ect on your endeavors to purify mind and 

heart. By Òspiritual readingÓ I mean holy scriptures, teachings of God-realized 
masters and the biographies of saints. Some philosophical or devotional books can 
also be good, but be sure the authors have spiritual experience so its vibration will 

be conveyed to you through their words.
Without desires or possessions
. Now this is very important. The karma yogi is not 
just to work, he is to work well and carefullyÐnot the sloppy and careless way that 

supposedly is a mark of a ÒspiritualÓ person who is indi
"
erent to material things. At 
the same time, the yogi must not become caught in the trap of perfectionism, of 
Òsuccess,Ó of the Òbigger and more is betterÓ attitude which would push him 

onward to increase his involvement in the world.
A devotee once asked Sri Ramakrishna: ÒWhat about worldly activities, duties of 
life?Ó He replied: ÒYes, do them too as much as is necessary for living in the world. 

But you should pray to him crying in solitude so that you may perform them 
selßessly. And you should say to him, ÔO Lord! Please reduce my worldly duties 
because, O God! I Þnd that if I get involved in too much work I forget you. I may 

think I am acting selßessly but it turns out to be selÞsh.ÕÓ
There we have it: the yogi should not avoid responsibility, but he should 
sincerely pray that his worldly duties and obligations will be reduced as much as 

possibleÐleaving it up to God to decide what Òas much as possibleÓ means. At the 
same time, the yogi should actively simplify his life in relation to the world, 
including the matter of personal possessions. (That does not mean getting rid of 

sacred and spiritual things, including books. I have known some deluded yogis who 
every time they ÒsimpliÞedÓ their life only got rid of holy imagery and spiritual 
books.)
So we are back at the home base of solitude. ÒDwelling in a solitary place,É he 
is Þt for union with BrahmanÓ (Bhagavad Gita 18:52-53). I am not speaking of 

being anti-social, but of being a serious yogi.
178
The YogiÕs Inner and Outer Life
A signiÞcant word in Sanskrit writings on spiritual life is 
adhikari
Ðthe state of 
being qualiÞed or worthy, implying both Þtness and capability. This is especially 
meaningful in the subject of yoga, for how can an individual engage in that which is 
the highest endeavor possible for any sentient being unless he is capable of 

sustaining and succeeding in his practice? The yogi is a very special person, indeed. 
As Paramhansa Yogananda said: ÒYoga is the beginning of the end.Ó The yogi is one 
entering the last stages of ripening on the tree of life.
Krishna tells Arjuna the basic requirements for a yogi, since simply knowing the 
mechanics of yoga is not at all enough, any more than knowing the rules of a sport 

can make someone a proÞcient athlete. The yogi, too, must live perpetually in 

training if he is to win the gold of spiritual realization.
Krishna has explained to Arjuna the need for living in a quiet and retired 
environment, even though active in the world. No matter how spiritual we like to 

think ourselves, our immediate environment and the condition of our body is a 
major factor in how our mind behaves in meditation. The external often dictates the 
condition of the internal. Now he takes up the subject of what the yogi should be 

doing in his retreatÐwhether at home or on retreat elsewhere. He has already 
mentioned the major activity, saying: ÒThe yogi should Þx his awareness constantly 
on the Self.Ó So he proceeds:
The yogiÕs seat (asana)
Establishing for himself a Þrm seat in a clean place, not too high and not 
too low, covered with kusha grass, an antelope skin and a cloth, (6:11).
Krishna assumes that the yogi will be sitting on the ground, as was usual in 
India at that time and even today in many instances. We will look at that Þrst and 
then consider other options. The ground should be Þrm, neither soft nor shifting as 
sand or gravel or on a heap of things that could slide. Sand is pulverized stone and 
after sitting awhile literally becomes stone-hard. Not being soft indicates also that 

the ground should be dry. The place should be clean, without dirt or debris. The 
yogi should not perch himself in a tree, on the edge of a precipice, or in/on any 
place where he might fall o
"
 if he fell over, either in sleep or samadhi.
Dampness and cold are often properties of earth where the yogi might sit, so he 
is directed to Þrst put down some kusha grass. Kusha grass is considered purifying, 

and rings woven of it are sometimes worn in worship to keep the hands ritually 

pure. It is also a remarkable insulator against cold and damp. In India I have used 
kusha mats with a blanket on top for sleeping on damp ground in bitterly cold 
weather, and was never bothered with either damp or cold underneath me. Such 

mats also make very good meditation seats, covered with a cloth. However, only 
dried kusha grass is used in matting, and the edges are very sharp and liable to cut 
179
the one handling it carelessly.
To compensate for this, and to increase the insulating e
"
ect, a deer skin may be 
placed over the kusha grass. A deer skin is the only animal skin considered 
appropriate for the yogiÕs meditation seat (asana) because the vibration of the 

deerskin is neutral and therefore conducive to peace and tranquility. However, the 
deer must have died a natural death. To use the skin of a deer killed for its skin is to 
violate the precept of ahimsa. One of my vivid memories of the Hardwar bazaar is 

seeing deer skins for sale that had bullet holes in them. When I once expressed 
disapproval of this to a shop owner, he was quite sympathetic and said: ÒI 
understand how you feel about the deer being shot by a gun. Quite a few yogis 

object to that. If you give me some time I will Þnd you one that was killed with a 
bow and arrow. And I will provide you with certiÞcation to that e
"
ect.Ó When I 
explained that I was objecting to the killing of the deer, no matter what form it 

took, I could see that he thought I was being quite eccentric. Nevertheless, leading 
yogis have told me themselves that the deer must have died naturally. This makes 
such a skin hard to come by, since decay will begin right away. But it is possible, for 

I have seen them.
To keep the deer skin from becoming worn (I knew one yogi that wore out a 
skin every four years because he traveled almost constantly), Krishna instructs that 

a cloth should be placed over that (my yogi friend did not do this). He does not 
specify what kind, but it is a good idea to use cloth made of natural Þbers. (Not 
silk, which is the congealed saliva of worms who are killed to obtain it.)
The yogiÕs chair
In the West many yogis prefer to use a cushion on the ßoor or sit on a chair. 
Both are perfectly Þne, for the posture that will soon be described by Krishna is 
possible in a chair. It is important that our meditation posture be comfortable and 
easy to maintain. If you can sit in a cross-legged position without your legs going to 

sleep and making you have to shift them frequently, that is very good. But 
meditation done in a chair is equally as good. Better to sit at ease in a chair and be 
inwardly aware than to sit cross-legged and be mostly aware of your poor, aching 

legs.
The chair should be comfortableÐnot hard, yet not so soft that you bob around 
when you sit upright. It should also be of a design that will prevent your falling over 

in deep relaxation. A padded armchair can be very good for this, or one which has a 
curved back that will keep you upright.
The chair should not be so high that your feet cannot be resting ßat on the ßoor, 
or so low that your knees are markedly above the base of your spine and can cause 

backache.
The insulation provided by kusha grass and deer skin are unnecessary when 
meditating in a chair so you need not bother with them. It is good if the chair can 

be used only for meditation. (The same applies to a pad or mat used for cross-
legged meditation on the ßoor.). This will pick up the beneÞcial vibrations of your 
180
meditation, and when you sit on it your mind will become calm and your 
meditation easier. If you cannot devote a chair to your meditation, Þnd some kind of 
cloth or throw that you can put over a chair when you meditate and remove when 
you are done.
The inner seat
Shankara wrote a short essay in which he analyzed the symbolism of the eight 
limbs of PatanjaliÕs Yoga. He says that the yogiÕs asana (seat) must be a steady mind 
which remains focused on its object of meditation. With this in mind, Krishna adds:
There, having directed his mind to a single object, controlling thought and 
activity of the senses, sitting on the seat he should practice yoga for the 

purpose of self-puriÞcation (6:12).
The senses, their functions, and the inner memory of their past sensations in 
various forms are to be held at bay by the meditator. As he does so, absorbed in his 

meditation on the Divine, his heart becomes increasingly pure.
The yogiÕs posture
Holding the body, head and neck erect, motionless and steady, looking 
toward the origin of his nose [nasikagram] and not looking around, (6:13).
Holding the body, head and neck erect
. The Kaivalya Upanishad (5) says: ÒKeeping 
the head, the neck and the body in a straight line.Ó The purpose of this is to ensure 
that the upright body will be balanced and not move. The head should be held so 

the chin is parallel to the ground. You need not be painfully exact about this. The 
idea is to hold your head at such an angle that it will not fall forward when you 
relax. Otherwise you will be a
#
icted with what meditators call Òthe bobsÓÐthe 

upper body continually falling forward during meditation.
Motionless and steady
. As the yogi meditates his body should not move back and 
forth or side to side, but be completely still. This is ideal, but please do not think 

that Krishna is advocating some kind of self-torturing coercion of the body. He does 
not say we should sit as sti
"
 as a petriÞed mummy, for that is just self-torment. The 
great yogic adepts also say that the posture must be comfortableÐeaseful and 

relaxed. The Yoga Sutras say: ÒPosture should be steady and comfortableÓ (Yoga 
Sutras 2:46). The 
Yoga Vashishtha
 simply says: ÒHe should sit in a comfortable 
posture conducive to equilibriumÓ (
Yoga Vashishtha
 6:1:128). Shankara comments: 
ÒLet him practice a posture in which, when established, his mind and limbs will 
become steady, and which does not cause pain.Ó Relaxation is the key, for the Yoga 
Sutras further say: ÒPosture is mastered by relaxationÓ (Yoga Sutras 2:47).
Looking toward the origin of his nose [nasikagram]
. It is equally reasonable to consider 
that the nose originates at the nosetip or at the point between the eyebrows. But 

since Krishna says later on (5:27), Òturning up the eyes toward the two brows 

[bhruvoh],Ó we can be sure he means the eyes should be turned gently upward as 
though looking at a distant point. He should not focus them on the point between 
the eyebrows as that will pull the eyes slightly inward and cause strain.
181
Not looking around
. This is not so hard to manageÐkeep your eyes turned up and 
closed!
Common sense must always be used. For example, those with back di
!
culties 
should make compensation for them, and not mind if they cannot sit fully upright.
Krishna makes no mention of the hands, because it does not really matter. Just 
rest them in your lap or on your thighs and forget about them.
The yogiÕs inner work
With mind quieted, banishing fear, Þrm in the brahmachariÕs vow, 
controlling the mind, with thoughts Þxed on me, steadfast, he should sit, 
devoted to me (6:14).
Just as there are several points for the yogiÕs outer practice, so it is with his 
inner practice, and we should consider them.
With mind quieted
. Many people become impatient with themselves or their 
practice if right away their mind does not calm down, but that is why yoga is a 

practice and not a matter of instantaneous e
"
ect. After all, each day we spend hours 

and hours stirring up our mind and forcing it into reactions of all kinds. Moreover, 
it is a living entity, not a machine that can be switched o
"
 with the ßick of a Þnger. 
Right meditation practice will certainly still the mind after a while. But we must be 

helping it by arranging our life in such a way that distractions will be minimal. Diet 
is also crucial here. A rajasic or tamasic diet (to be discussed in the seventeenth 
chapter) hinders the e
!
ciency of yoga meditation. And most of all, our thoughts 

and emotions condition the mind substance, making it either easier or more 
di
!
cult to still.
Banishing fear
. This is not often discussed in writings or talks on yoga, but it 
should be given attention. It is no surprise that when we sit for meditation we will 

Þnd that our mind is restless and trivial. We also realize that long-buried impulses 
from the past (including past lives) may surface, such as anger, lust, greed, and so 

forth. But in so many lives, as well as this one, we have been in situations that 
produced a great range of fear in us, from simple apprehension to absolute terror. 
When such things surface we are not aware of the cause, only the fear itself, and 

this actually compounds the fear. The fear of death also can arise, because in 
meditation, as in sleep, there is an approximation of the withdrawal of the life force 
that occurs in death. I have known a few people who were bothered by the fear of 

death in the beginning of their meditation practice. How did they overcome it? By 
the determined practice of meditation itselfÐnothing special was needed. So when 
unreasoning fear rushes over us, we need only keep on as usual and it will be 

banished. At times we may feel anxiety at the onset of peculiar sensations in the 
body as well as the mind, and fear that we may be harmed by whatever is producing 
them. There is also fear in the form of doubt to be contended with: fear that our 

meditation may be of no e
"
ect, or fear that we will not attain as much as we should, 
and even fear that we will not live long enough to make any signiÞcant progress. All 
these are just vagaries of the ego-mind and should be ignored.
182
Firm in the brahmachariÕs vow
. Certainly, part of the brahmacharin vow is celibacy, 
for even non-monastics must live a disciplined and non-sensual life. The idea that 
God created or ordained marriage so men and women could have all the sex they 
wanted in an approved setting is outrageous. All who aspire to true humanityÐ

much less divinityÐmust be chaste in body and mind. Those who do not wish to so 
live should do as they please, but leave yoga alone. This is why Patanjali says that 
the Þrst step in yoga is moral observance (yama-niyama) which includes 

brahmacharya.
The Dharma Shastras which describe the correct life of non-monastics are quite 
explicit about the need for husband and wife to lead lives of continence. See how 

the yogi parents of Paramhansa Yogananda lived it as presented in 
Autobiography of a 
Yogi
. In the very Þrst chapter we Þnd: ÒMother made a remarkable admission to my 

eldest sister Roma: ÔYour father and myself live together as man and wife only once 

a year, for the purpose of having children.ÕÓ The fact that Yogananda, a devoted son 
and a pure-hearted yogi, would reveal this to the world in the pages of a book show 
how necessary he felt it was for both Eastern and Western readers to be shown the 

standard of chastity that yogis should observe in their life, not using their non-
monastic status as excuse for lesser behavior. He underlined this later in the forty-
fourth chapter, giving these words written to Mahatma Gandhi by his wife 

Kasturbai: ÒI thank you for the most perfect marriage in the world, based on
 
brahmacharya
 and not on sex.Ó Please note that these are examples of married yogis, 
not monks imposing their ideas on others. Also remember that the guru of 

YoganandaÕs parents was himself a married yogi, so there is no monastic inßuence 
in their case.
Having said all this, I must point out that the brahmacharin vow (vrata) involves 
the discipline, puriÞcation, control, and non-indulgence of all the senses. 

Furthermore, it is a vowÐa voluntary resolution. Those who do not wish to make 
such a resolution need not do so. But they should not lie to themselves and others 

by claiming to be yogis.
Controlling the mind
. When the mind is quieted, rendered fearless, and 
strengthened by the power (virya) accumulated through continence and discipline 

of the senses (for the word ÒvirtueÓ is derived from the Latin word for power), 
thenÐand only thenÐit can be controlled.
With thoughts Þxed on me
. The mind must not be made empty and static, for that 
would be stagnation and conscious coma. Rather, mantra japa that impels the 

consciousness toward God must be generated in a constant, though calm, stream.
Steadfast
. The mind must be gathered up and made unitary. This is the meaning 
of the word ÒyuktaÓ in this verse. The mind must be joined or ÒyokedÓ Þrst to itself 

and then to God in the state of yoga, of union.
He should sit
. Both body and mind need to be steady. Shankara says that asana 
means steadiness of mind as well as of body. It has been said that Buddha became 

enlightened because he knew how to ÒsitÓ through Þrm resolution, holding body 
and mind under his control.
183
Devoted to me
. Such union is not abstract, it is a Þlling of the consciousness with 
God as the eternal Object-Subject. The Þrst step, the precursor to God-awareness, is 
Self-awareness. In that awareness we Þnd our true Self and then the Self of our Self, 
God. That is why Jesus spoke of ÒlosingÓ our life to ÒÞndÓ it in the greater, primal 

Life that is God (Matthew 16:25).
The yogiÕs Goal
Always disciplining himself thus, the yogi whose mind is subdued goes to 
the supreme peace of nirvana, and attains to union with me (6:15).
Ever keeping this in mind and following what Krishna has just told us, the yogi 
will come to the Goal unerringly and, comparatively speaking, easily.

A general principle
Now Krishna gives us a general principle for our way of life: 
Yoga is not eating too much, nor is it virtually not eating at all; not the 
habit of sleeping too much, and not keeping awake too much, either. For him 
who is moderate in food and diversion, disciplined in action, moderate in 
sleep and waking, yoga destroys all su
"
ering (6:16-17).
Prabhavananda puts it very smoothly: ÒYoga is not for the man who overeats, or 
for him who fasts excessively. It is not for him who sleeps too much, or for the 

keeper of exaggerated vigils. Let a man be moderate in his eating and his recreation, 
moderately active, moderate in sleep and in wakefulness. He will Þnd that yoga 

takes away all his unhappiness.Ó
Except in the matters of yama and niyama, which are absolutes, moderation is 
the yogiÕs motto. Cool-headedness is essential for him. As Sri Ramakrishna often 

remarked, crazes and extremes are detrimental to spiritual life. This is especially 
true because crazes and extremes often mask or express mental and spiritual 
pathologies. We should be enthusiastic about the spiritual life, but we must be 

equally sensible and moderate. Then yoga will be for us.
184
Union With Brahman
Krishna tells us the facts
How can we tell who is an enlightened person? The answer is to be found in the 
Gita. There the internal state of the perfected yogi is outlinedÐa state that can only 
be known to the yogi himself, that cannot be observed externally and subjected to a 

checklist, for it is purely internal in character. As Yogananda used to sing: ÒHe who 
knowsÉ he knows. None else knows!Ó The Kaivalya Upanishad describes the 
enlightened person as saying: ÒI know all that is, but no one knows meÓ (Kaivalya 

Upanishad 21).
A truly enlightened person will say what is found in the Kena Upanishad: ÒI 
cannot say that I know Brahman fully. Nor can I say that I know him not. He among 

us knows him best who understands the spirit of the words: ÔNor do I know that I 
know him not.Õ He truly knows Brahman who knows him as beyond knowledge; he 
who thinks that he knows, knows not. The ignorant think that Brahman is known, 

but the wise know him to be beyond knowledgeÓ (Kena Upanishad 2:2, 3). 
Nevertheless, Krishna is able to give us a working idea of enlightenment, one which 
can be useful to the individual yogi so he will not mistake the goal or mistakenly 

assume he has attained it before he really has.
It is all in the mind
When he is absorbed in the Self alone, with mind controlled, free from 
longing, from all desires, then he is known to be steadfast (6:18).
Here we Þnd three traits of mind necessary for enlightenment: 1) total 
absorption in the Self, 2) perfect control of the mind, and 3) complete freedom from 
desire. This is a great deal for us to work on, and without diligent yoga practice it is 
impossible. Some or all of these may be managed occasionally in meditation, but 

that is not enlightenment. For Krishna continues:
As a lamp in a windless place ßickers not: to such is compared the yogi of 
controlled mind, performing the yoga of the Self (6:19).
Flashes of enlightenment can come to the yogi, but he must not be satisÞed with 
ßeeting experiences of the Self, but must strive to become permanently established 

in consciousness of the Self. This state cannot be attained by talk and wishful 

thinking. Rather:
When the mind comes to rest, restrained by the practice of yoga, 
beholding the Self by the Self, he is content in the Self (6:20).
There is no way to enter into the state of enlightenment except through yoga. 
Certainly we sometimes hear of rare individuals who entered into perfect 

knowledge of the Self with minimal e
"
ort or even upon merely hearing of the Self. 

But such persons have attained illumination in previous lives. There are no 
shortcuts to enlightenment.
185
When the mind ceases its movements and becomes permanently stilled, the Self 
is known. As long as the surface of water is moving to any degree there is distortion 
in the reßected image, but once it comes to absolute stillness, the image is perfect 
(complete) and undistorted. It is the same with the mind. The mind can be likened 

to a double-sided mirror which reßects both the outer world and the inner Self. 
Both sides must be stilled through yoga. Then the yogi Þnds profound peace and 
rests contented in the Self. Only in the illumined Self does he behold (know) the 

Self. For it is 
swayamprakasha
, self-illuminated and self-illuminating.
He knows that endless joy which is apprehended by the buddhi beyond the 
senses; and established in that he does not deviate from the truth [
tattwatah
: 

thatness] (6:21).
That the inÞnite happiness of the Self can be experienced by the buddhi is an 
extremely important point. InÞnite consciousness transcends the senses and 

therefore the sensory mind, the manas, but it is not beyond the experience of the 
buddhi, the higher mind, the intellect. For the word buddhi is derived from the root 
verb 
budh
, which means Òto enlighten, to know.Ó
The buddhi can be illumined by the Self. This is most signiÞcant, for it is usually 
assumed that all levels of the mind are dissolved at the advent of enlightenment, 

that the liberated yogi has no mind. But this is a misunderstanding. As Sri Ramana 

Maharshi continually pointed out, at the onset of enlightenment the buddhi is not 
destroyed, but rather is transmuted into the SelfÐfor nothing ever really exists but 
the Self. As I say, this is important, for those who have no actual experience or 

realization make all kinds of statements, such as that since the enlightened have no 
mind they have no subconscious mind, and therefore cannot dream. And they love 
to challenge a yogi with the question: ÒDo you dream?Ó If the answer is Yes, they 

declare the yogi unenlightened. But when Ramana Maharshi was confronted with 
this silly question he simply said: ÒYes. But not like your dreams.Ó When asked 
what his dreams were like, he answered that when asleep (yes, he did sleep) he saw 

the forms of deities and templesÐtwo nemeses of contemporary Òadvaitins.Ó
Unshaken by sorrow or su
"
ering
Standing Þrm in his realization, the yogi never loses or moves away from his 
perceptions of Reality.
Having attained this, he regards no other gain better than that, and 
established therein he is not moved by heaviest sorrow (6:22).
No su
"
ering can overshadow or cloud the yogiÕs inner vision, no matter how 
terrible or prolonged it may be. Two events come to mind that illustrate this.
Sri Ramakrishna was in the Þnal stages of throat cancer. Its ravages were 
terrible. One day he began pathetically describing the horrible pain to a disciple. 
After listening a while, the disciple interrupted him, vehemently saying: ÒNo matter 

what you say, I see you as an ocean of bliss!Ó Sri Ramakrishna smiled, turned to a 
disciple standing nearby, and said: ÒThis rascal has found me out!Ó And that was 
the end of the subject.
186
Toward the end of his earthly life, Paramhansa Yogananda had severe trouble 
with his legs, at times being unable to walk. Sometimes when the pains were so bad 
that he could not sleep, close disciples would sit with him in his bedroom. Often he 
asked them to play recordings of Indian devotional music to take his mind to higher 

levels. Once, though, he fell asleep as his Þrst American disciple, Dr. M. W. Lewis, 
and his wife kept sad vigil in his room. After some time, Yogananda began to softly 
moan, and then his groans became increasingly louder and more expressive of the 

awful pain. Both devoted disciples began to weep in sympathy for his su
"
erings. 
Instantly Yogananda stopped groaning and began laughing. Then they understood: 
the great Master was always immersed in divine bliss, however much the body 

might su
"
er.
The real yoga
Let this dissolution of union with pain be known as yoga. This yoga is to 
be practiced with determination, with an assured mind (6:23).
The most important part of this is to realize that cessation of su
"
ering is not a 
side e
"
ect, but can be pursued directly. The Gita uses the tongue-twister 
dukhasamyogaviyogam
Ðthe yoga of the dissolving of union with pain.
How shall we succeed in this yoga?
Abandoning those desires whose origins lie in oneÕs intentionÐall of them 
without exceptionÐalso completely restraining the many senses by the mind, 

(6:24).
Desires may persist, but we must steadfastly turn from them, restraining the 
senses by the mind. We need not even cut them o
"
. Instead we should Þx our 
minds on God. For since all desires are merely aberrations of the primal desire to 

Þnd God that is in each one of us, the false desires will melt away. Yet it is not 
enough to just want to cut o
"
 desires, for desires are not self-existent entities. 
Rather, they arise from the senses as a result of contact with sense-objects. So the 

senses must be thoroughly controlled and restrained, placed under the directorship 
of our intelligent will.
It will not be an overnight matter or instant success. So Krishna says:
With the buddhi Þrmly controlled, with the mind Þxed on the Self, he 
should gain quietude by degrees: let him not think of any extraneous thing 

whatever (6:25).
That is quite clear, but it should be pointed out that the constant practice of 
yoga in the form of japa and meditation is the only way to Þx our mind on the Self 

and keep it steadily there so that in all the experiences of life we will remain in 

unbroken awareness of Spirit. It is through japa and meditation that we can also 
follow KrishnaÕs next directive:
Whenever the unsteady mind, moving here and there, wanders o
"
, he 
should subdue and hold it back and direct it to the SelfÕs control (6:26).
This is immeasurably important. We restrain and control the intellect by 
immersing it in the Self. The Sanskrit text literally means Òhe leads it into the Self.Ó 
187
In other words he establishes, he centers, the buddhi in the Self (Atman). The fact 
that the buddhi can experience the Self must never be forgotten by us. This 
revolutionizes our entire approach to attaining realization of the Self. The means is 
right at hand. We need only know the way and do it. It may not be fast, but 
it will be 
sure
.
Success
Shankara says at the beginning of his commentary on the Yoga Sutras that 
unless the aspiring yogi knows the beneÞts which the practice of yoga will bring it 
is impractical to think that he will persevere. After all, who would work to gain 

something he does not really know about? ÒSome kind of rewardÓ would not be 
enough of an incentive. Krishna then speaks of the results of the yoga he has been 
recommending to us:
The yogi whose mind is truly tranquil, with emotions calmed, free of evil, 
having become one with Brahman, attains the supreme happiness (6:27).
Peaceful, passionless, pure, and blissfulÐwho would not earnestly strive for such 
a prize? Even more:
Thus constantly engaging himself in the practice of yoga, that yogi, freed 
from evil, easily touching Brahman, attains boundless happiness (6:28).
He still walks the way, and does so until he attains the highest realm and merges 
with the Absolute, but it is now easy (sukhena) and anandamayiÐÞlled with bliss.
The eye of the yogi
He who is steadfast in yoga (yoga-yukta) at all times sees the Self present 
in all beings and all beings present in the Self (6:29).
What a glorious vision! Since the Self and Brahman are one, the Self being the 
microcosm and Brahman the macrocosm, everything that exists can be found in 
either one, though in the individual Self it is only a kind of seed-reßection.
It is essential for us to comprehend the fact that the illumined yogi never 
confuses himself with Brahman the Absolute. Even if he says: ÒI am Brahman,Ó he 

means that Brahman is his essential nature. For example, we can say of a gold 

statue that it is gold, but we will not mean that it is all the gold in the worldÐonly 
that it is made from gold. In the same way our Self is of the substance of Brahman, 
but it is not the totality of Brahman.
So the yogi does not experience that he, personally, is in all things and all things 
within him in the same way that Brahman experiences unity with all. The yogi does 

experience a unity with all things, and as I say he experiences all things within 

himself as seed-reßections. I once described this kind of experience in an 
autobiographical writing in this way:
ÒWhile meditating one day all ordinary physical sensation vanished. Spatial 
relation ceased to exist and I found myself keenly aware of being beyond dimension, 

neither large nor small, but inÞnite (for inÞnity is beyond size). Although the 
terminology is inappropriate to such a state, to make it somewhat understandable I 
188
have to say that I perceived an inÞnity of worlds ÔwithinÕ me. SunsÐsome solo and 
others surrounded by planetsÐglimmered inside my spaceless space. Not that I 
saw
 
the light, but I 
felt
 or intuited it. Actually, I did not ÔseeÕ anythingÐand yet I did. It is 
not expressible in terms of ordinary sense experience, yet I must use those terms.
ÒI experienced myself as everything that existed within the relative material 
universe. Or so it seemed, for the human body is a miniature universe, a 

microcosmic model of the macrocosm. The physical human body is a reßection of 

the universal womb that conceived it. I had experienced the subtle level of the 
physical body that is its ideational (i.e., causal) blueprint. On that level it can be 
experienced as a map of the material creation.Ó
Later, Dr. Judith Tyberg, director of the East-West Cultural Center in Los 
Angeles, told me that she had attended a lecture at Benares Hindu University in 

which a map of the universe and charts from 
GrayÕs Anatomy
 were compared and 
seen to be strikingly alike.
Such an experience as mine is not what is meant by Cosmic Consciousness, but 
rather is consciousness of the inner reßected cosmos. Nevertheless, it has value. 

However, the perfected yogi has the same experience in a much more profound and 
practical manner, and actually knows and perceives all things in an 
incomprehensible manner. I have told my experience so those who have similar 

events will not assume they are the InÞnite.
Now here is the really important part of the matter. Ignorant people 
experiencing momentarily what the yoga adept sees always, will be keenly aware of 

the What of their seeing. But the enlightened yogi sees the Who, as Krishna points 
out, saying: 
He who sees me everywhere, and sees all things in meÐI am not lost to 
him, and he is not lost to me (6:30).
Prabhavananda: ÒThat yogi sees me in all things, and all things within me. He 
never loses sight of me, nor I of him.Ó The yogi sees Brahman at all times, 
understanding that all things are but waves in the ocean of Brahmic Consciousness, 
including himself. This is depicted in Swami SivanandaÕs thrilling poem, 
Only God I 
Saw
:
When I surveyed from Ananda Kutir, Rishikesh,
By the side of the Tehri Hills, only God I saw.

In the Ganges and the Kailas peak,
In the famous Chakra Tirtha of Naimisar also, only God I saw.
In the Dedhichi Kand of Misrik,
In the sacred Triveni of Prayag Raj too, only God I saw.
In the Maya Kund of Rishikesh and

In the springs of Badri, Yamunotri and Gauri-Kund to boot, only God I saw.
In tribulation and in grief, in joy and in glee,
189
In sickness and in sorrow, only God I saw.
In birds and dogs, in stones and trees,
In ßowers and fruits, in the sun, moon and stars, only God I saw.
In the rosy cheeks of Kashmiri ladies,
In the dark faces of African negroes, only God I saw.
In Þlth and scents, in poison and dainties,

In the market and in society, only God I saw.
In trains and cars, in aeroplanes and steamers,
In Jutkas and dandies, in tumtums and landan, only God I saw.
I talked to the ßowers, they smiled and nodded,
I conversed with the running brooks, they verily responded, only God I saw.
In prayer and fasting, in praise and meditation,
In Japa and Asana, in Tratak and concentration, only God I saw.

In Pranayama and Nauli, in Bhasti and Neti,
In Dhouti and Vajroli, in Bhastrika and Kundalini, only God I saw.
In Brahmakara Vritti and Vedantic Nididhyasana,
In Atmic Vichara and Atmic Chintana, only God I saw.
In Kirtan and Nama Smaran, in Sravana and Vandana,

In Archana and Padasevana, in Dasya and Atmanivedana, only God I saw.
Like camphor I was melting in his Þre of knowledge,
Amidst the ßames outßashing, only God I saw.
My Prana entered the Brahmarandhra at the Moordha,
Then I looked with GodÕs eyes, only God I saw.
I passed away into nothingness, I vanished,
And lo, I was the all-living, only God I saw.

I enjoyed the Divine Aisvarya, all GodÕs Vibhutis,
I had Visvaroopa Darshan, the Cosmic Consciousness, only God I saw.
Om, Om, Om, only God I saw.
What better comment could there be on SivanandaÕs attainment expressed in 
this poem than KrishnaÕs next words:
He, established in unity, worships me dwelling in all things. Whatever be 
his mode of life, that yogi ever abides in me (6:31).
The main characteristic of Sivananda was his love of all humanity and indeed of 
all sentient beings. Daily I saw his compassion for all he encountered. So KrishnaÕs 
next words describe his state of mind and heart as well as that of all who truly 
190
know Brahman:
He who judges pleasure or pain by the same standard everywhere that he 
applies unto himself, that yogi is deemed the highest (6:32).
Krishna has in these verses given the real facts about the interior state of those 
who know Brahman. It is wisdom to ever keep these in mind when encountering 
those who are thought to be enlightened, and even more wisdom to keep applying 
them to ourselves so we will press onward to the fruition of yoga: Brahman, and 

Brahman alone.
191
The YogiÕs Future
The dilemma
Krishna has told Arjuna of the disciplines necessary for the yogi and has told 
him of the exalted states which he can attain. To all this Arjuna puts the following 
question-statement:
Arjuna said: This yoga which is taught by you characterized by evenness of 
mind, I do not see how it endures, owing to the mindÕs restlessness. The 

mind is truly unstable, troubling, strong and unyielding. I believe it is hard to 

controlÐas hard to control as the wind (6:33-34).
A common simile of the mind used in India is that of a kite which can ßy very 
high into the sky, so high it can barely be seen, yet a tug on the line and down it 

falls to earth! Sri Ramakrishna was very fond of two songs on this theme:
In the market place of the world, O Mother, you are ßying kites.

They ßy high lifted by the wind of hope and held fast by the string of maya.É
and:

The kite of my mind was ßying in the sky of the MotherÕs feet.
Jolted by the evil wind of sin it turned over and fell down.

It became heavy and tilted on one side by maya.
I cannot raise it up again.É
Its crest of knowledge has been torn.

It falls down no sooner I lift it up.É
It was tied to the string of devotion,
But it became confused as it got into play.É
Sri Ramakrishna often compared the unpuriÞed mind to a vulture that ßies so 
high it is hardly even a dot in the sky, yet its entire attention is centered on the 
earth below, looking for dead bodies to eat. The idea of both similes is that the 
sensory mindÐthe manas, not the buddhiÐis capable of rising very high, but yet it is 
tightly bound to earth and will after a while descend. Anyone who seeks higher 

awareness knows this to be all too true.
There is hope, nevertheless:
What can be done
The Holy Lord said: Without doubt the mind is hard to control and 
restless; but through practice (abhyasa) and dispassion (vairagya) it is 

governed (6:35).
Abhyasa and vairagya will tame the wandering mind. Abhyasa is not just 
192
spiritual practice, but 
sustained
 spiritual practiceÐperseverance. Although spiritual 
practice is a fundamental need for the yogi, it must be done with a proper attitude 
toward that which agitates the mind and sends it sinking toward the very things the 
yogi wishes to escape. Therefore vairagya is also necessary. Vairagya is non-

attachment or indi
"
erence to those disturbing elementsÐeven a distaste for them. 
This is not an easy outlook to gain, but steadiness in the practice of meditation will 
make it possible. For Krishna continues:
I agree that yoga is di
!
cult to attain by him whose lower self is 
uncontrolled; but by him whose lower self is controlled by striving by right 

means, it is possible to attain it (6:36).
It is a fact: yoga is not for the weak or the lazy.
FearÐor hope?
Arjuna has already protested that he thinks it is impossible to control the mind. 
Such an attitude springs from inner negativity and troubles many yogis, especially 

in the beginning. Now another face of the ego emerges: pessimism.
Arjuna said: One who has faith but is uncontrolled, whose mind has fallen 
away from yoga without reaching perfection in yogaÐwhich way does he go? Is 

he not lost like a dissolving cloud, fallen from both worldsÐhere and hereafter, 

having no solid ground, confused on the path of Brahman? You are able to 
completely remove this my doubt. Other than you there is no one who can 
dispel this doubt (6:37-39).
If I had the proverbial nickel for every time some spiritual loafer asked me if 
there are not people who just are not ready for yoga, and would it not be better to 

not try than to try and fail, I would not have the proverbial fortune, but I would 

have a hefty sack to carry around. Arjuna is following the same line, which I expect 
was old and tired even then, thousands of years ago.
Krishna, worthy teacher, now tells ArjunaÐand usÐthe real facts of the matter.
The yogiÕs future
The Holy Lord said: Truly there is no loss for him either here on earth or 
in heaven. No one who does good goes to misfortune (6:40).
We must Þx this truth Þrmly in our minds. First, in relation to ourselves: 
seeking Brahman assures us of a good end, especially if we persevere. Second, in 
relation to others: even if they turn away from the search for God, the force of the 
spiritual karma created by their spiritual searching at least for a while will 
guarantee a positive future for them, even if only in the next or a future life.
There is a technical term in Sanskrit for one who has fallen away from the 
practice of Yoga: 
yogabhrashta
. Krishna now discusses the good fate of the 
yogabhrashta:
Attaining the worlds of the meritorious, having dwelt there for countless 
years, he who has fallen from yoga is reborn in a happy and illustrious family 

(6:41).
193
After death the former yogi will go into the higher astral regions, impelled by 
the tremendously positive karma that is always produced by yoga practice. In those 
realms of great peace, happiness, and clarity of mind he will remain for a long time, 
continuing to reÞne his understanding and preparing for a spiritually fortunate 

rebirth. After that, he will be reborn in a happy and illustrious (
shuchinam shrimatam
) 
family. For the yogiÕs parents will be of admirable character and recognized for it by 
those around them. This is why in India it is assumed that a saint will have been 

born of spiritually illustrious parents, perhaps even having saints in his ancestry.
Or else he may be born into a family of wise yogis. Truly, a birth such as 
that is more di
!
cult to obtain in this world (6:42).
It is di
!
cult because there are so few families of accomplished yogis, and 
because such persons, habitually observing brahmacharya, will have very few 

children, if any.
There he regains the knowledge he acquired in his former incarnation, and 
strives from thence once more toward perfection. Truly without his willing it 

his previous practice impels him on the yogic path. He who just desires to 

know about yoga goes beyond the Vedas (6:43-44).
How wondrous is yoga. Although it is sad to see someone fall away from the 
yoga life, the spiritual force generated will manifest in the next birth. We can be 

totally optimistic about anyone who takes up yoga, for those who just want to know 
about yoga enter into a stream of life that will carry them onward and upward.
I know this is true because I met a yogi in India who told me that he 
remembered his previous life as a Franciscan monk in Italy. He had heard that in 

India there were people called yogis who knew the way to God. From that moment 
onward he yearned to go to India to meet those who could tell him how to Þnd and 

know God. He even tried to Þnd some way to get to India. He died with this 
unfulÞlled desire and in his next life was born in India and became a yogi.
Another man I met in India was a European who had entered a Roman Catholic 
seminary with the speciÞc purpose of becoming a missionary to India. ÒAfter a few 

years,Ó he told me, ÒI realized that I did not want to be a missionary at allÐI just 
wanted to go to India!Ó So he left the seminary and went to India, where I met him 

in the ashram of the great Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh.
By persevering e
"
ort and mastery, the totally puriÞed yogi, perfected 
through many births, reaches the Supreme Goal (6:45).
Ultimate success in yoga is assuredÐin contrast to every other earthly endeavor. 
So the wise do not delay, but become yogis now and persevere.
Great is that yogi!
The concluding words of this sixth chapter of the Gita are intended to inspire us 
to seek out and follow the path of yoga. For as Shankara observed at the beginning 
of his commentary on the Yoga Sutras, if the prospective yogi has no idea of the 
value of yoga practice he cannot be expected to persevere. So Krishna says:
The yogi is superior to ascetics 
[tapaswins]
, and considered superior to 
194
jnanis and superior to those engaged in Vedic rituals 
[karmakanda]
. Therefore 
be a yogi (6:46).
Being immersed in body-identiÞcation, people are very impressed with anything 
physical. Asceticism and unusual physical control are prized even by those who 
claim to identify with the spirit instead of the body. Those with a bit more evolution 
to their credit are more impressed with intellectual attainments, especially with the 
ability to write or speak in an arresting or inspirational manner. The majority, 

however, are mostly impressed by good deeds of many kinds: philanthropy, 
heroism, great success, and power. But Krishna tells us that those who seek union 
with Brahman are far greater than any of these. Then he gives the traits of a real 

yogi destined to attain Brahman:
Of all the yogis, he who has merged his inner Self in me and honors me, 
full of faith, I consider him the most devoted to me (6:47).
True worship of God is not ritual worship or good works but consciously uniting 
ourselves with God. This is real faith and devotion directed to God. So if we wish to 

be truly great men and women, all we need do is seek God. For those who Þnd God 

Þnd everything to an inÞnite degree.
195
Success in Yoga
Success is one of the gods of the modern worldÐbut only material success. 
Krishna, however, is interested in success of spirit, and we should be, too. So:
The Holy Lord said: With mind absorbed in me, practicing yoga, taking 
refuge in me, hear how without doubt you shall know me completely (7:1).
Perhaps one of the reasons Vyasa chose a battleÞeld as the setting for the 
immortal dialogue of the Gita is the necessity for cutting straight to the facts 
without delays. Once the battleÞeld is entered, diplomacy is left behindÐif it had not 

failed there would be no battle. Only the factsÐthe immediate factsÐnow matter. It is 
no surprise, then, that in all spiritual traditions we Þnd military references and 
symbols to some degree. This verse certainly embodies the factuality and urgency of 

battleÐtraits that we require in our own personal battle for higher consciousness. 
Here then are the factors necessary for our success.
With mind absorbed in me, practicing yoga.
 It is only to be expected that an inquirer 
will not commit to such an intense involvement with yoga until Þrst some 

experience of its value has been gained. But it is absolutely essential that once the 
aspirant comes to see the value of yoga he must consider the necessity of making 

yoga practice the core of his lifeÐeverything else must become secondary. Further, 
anything found to conßict with the practice of yoga must be eliminated from the 
yogiÕs inner and outer life. Without this complete dedication success in yoga is 

impossible.
I am not saying that everything in a personÕs life is to be displaced by yoga, that 
yoga is supposed to crowd out everything so that nothing else remains, but only 

that yoga must be central to the yogiÕs life and be given Þrst priority. This is because 
every element in our life must be looked at from a yogic perspective and ordered 
accordingly. Since most peopleÕs lives are conglomerates of addictions rather than 

principles or rational choices, this can be a very di
!
cult matter indeed. To reach the 
sweet we must Þrst go through the bitter. It would not be honest to tell you 
otherwise.
When Mahendranath Gupta asked Sri Ramakrishna: ÒHow ought we to live in 
the world?Ó Sri Ramakrishna told him: ÒDo all your duties, but keep your mind on 

God. Live with allÐwith wife and children, father and motherÐand serve them. Treat 

them as if they were very dear to you, but know in your heart of hearts that they do 
not belong to you. 
ÒA maidservant in the house of a rich man performs all the household duties, 
but her thoughts are Þxed on her own home in her native village. She brings up her 

MasterÕs children as if they were her own. She even speaks of them as Ômy RamaÕ or 
Ômy Hari.Õ But in her own mind she knows very well that they do not belong to her 

at all. 
ÒThe tortoise moves about in the water. But can you guess where her thoughts 
196
are? There on the bank, where her eggs are lying. Do all your duties in the world, 
but keep your mind on God. 
ÒIf you enter the world without Þrst cultivating love for God, you will be 
entangled more and more. You will be overwhelmed with its danger, its grief, its 

sorrows. And the more you think of worldly things, the more you will be attached 
to them. 
ÒFirst rub your hands with oil and then break open the jack-fruit; otherwise they 
will be smeared with its sticky milk. First secure the oil of divine love, and then set 

your hands to the duties of the world. 
ÒBut one must go into solitude to attain this divine love. To get butter from milk 
you must let it set into curd in a secluded spot; if it is too much disturbed, milk 

wonÕt turn into curd. Next, you must put aside all other duties, sit in a quiet spot, 
and churn the curd. Only then do you get butter. 
ÒFurther, by meditating on God in solitude the mind acquires knowledge, 
dispassion, and devotion. But the very same mind goes downward if it dwells in the 

world. In the world there is only one thought: Ôwoman and gold.Õ
ÒThe world is water and the mind milk. If you pour milk into water they become 
one; you cannot Þnd the pure milk any more. But turn the milk into curd and churn 

it into butter. Then, when that butter is placed in water, it will ßoat. So, practice 

spiritual discipline in solitude and obtain the butter of knowledge and love. Even if 
you keep that butter in the water of the world the two will not mix. The butter will 
ßoat. 
ÒTogether with this, you must practice discrimination. ÔWoman and goldÕ is 
impermanent. God is the only Eternal Substance. What does a man get with 

money? Food, clothes, and a dwelling-placeÐnothing more. You cannot realize God 

with its help. Therefore money can never be the goal of life. That is the process of 
discrimination. Do you understand?Ó
There should be no Òhidden chargesÓ in yoga. Right from the Þrst we should 
know what will be required of us if we intend to persevere. And we must decide to 

meet the requirements. Otherwise it is all a waste of time for everyone. The mind 
must be totally dedicated to God as the Supreme Goal and the Supreme Means. 

This is because real yoga is nothing less than communion with God right from the 
start, however faint or tenuous it may be. For Òthe path of the just is as the shining 
light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect dayÓ (Proverbs 4:18).
Taking refuge in me.
 That is, we must make God the only answer to our internal 
problems, and not resort to mental and emotional gimmicks, such as purely 

intellectual ÒjnanaÓ and whimsical Òbhakti,Ó that will only hide the troubles. Even 

though we should sensibly do our best in a practical manner in relation to our 
external di
!
culties, even there God should have priority so our external tangles will 
not turn into mental turmoils. 
If we will observe these two principles, Krishna assures us: Òwithout doubt you 
shall know me completely.Ó Then he continues: 
To you I shall explain in full this knowledge, along with realization, which, 
197
being known, nothing further remains to be known in this world (7:2).
Then we will be ready to get out of what a friend of mine used to call Òthis dumb 
kindergarten of earthÓ and move up to a higher level of evolution.
The few
The beneÞts of yoga are so marvelous, yet:
Of thousands of human beings scarcely anyone at all strives for perfection, 
and of those adept in that striving, scarcely anyone knows me in truth (7:3).
ÒThen said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto 
them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter 

in, and shall not be ableÓ (Luke 13:23, 24). Why so few? Because few will devote 
their whole mind to God, practice yoga, and take refuge in God alone, making God 
the Sole Reality in their life. Such persons are rare, but we must at some time or 

other in the round of rebirths become one of them. So why not now, rather than 
later?
198
The Net and Its Weaver
A few verses further on from where we are at the moment Krishna says:
ÒTruly this divine illusion [maya] of mine made of the gunas is di
!
cult to go 
beyondÓ (7:14).
Since time immemorial Maya has been referred to as a net such as is used for 
catching Þsh and birds. However hard it may be to break through this net, we must 
all do so in time, and the spiritually intelligent try to break through right now 
without delay. We need to understand the net very well. And so Krishna says:
Prakriti
Earth, water, Þre, air, ether, mind, intellect and ego-principle: these are the 
eight divisions of my prakriti (7:4).
Before we look closer at this listing, we must keep in mind that there are two 
Prakritis, the lower and higher, or the lesser and the greater. Everything mentioned 
in this verse is energy, because the lower Prakriti itself is Primal Energy or Power 
(Shakti). Everything that exists is energy, part of the lower Prakriti. What we have 
here is a listing of the lower Prakriti. Since mastership is our goal as yogis, Krishna 

is enumerating that which must be directly controlled through our yogic 
development. The list is short, but the challenge is long.
First we have the Þve primal elements (panchabhuta): earth, water, Þre, air, and 
ether. Everything else is a combination of these Þve forms of energy (more 

accurately: Þve forms of behavior or arrangement of energy). The three remaining 
are ÒmirrorsÓ of intelligence: mind (manas), intellect (buddhi) and ego (ahankara).
The manas is the sensory mind, the perceiving faculty that receives the messages 
of the senses. Buddhi is the intellect, the faculty of understanding and reasonÐthe 

thinking mind. Ahankara is the feeling of ÒI am.Ó It is not the true SelfÐfor the Self 

is pure wisdom and need not feel or think. Rather, it is the ego-sense, the 
intermediary between the Self and the bodies in which it is encased. Because it 
often takes over and blinds us to the Self, the ego is usually spoken of in a very 

negative sense. But without the ego the Self could not possibly operate through the 
energy-complex necessary for our evolution.
The manas sees a shape. The buddhi says: ÒThat is a tree.Ó The ahankara 
concludes: ÒI am seeing a tree.Ó All experience, inner and outer, is processed by 

these three. In fact, most of us are conÞned to our experiences that proceed from 
them. However:
Behind it all
This is my lower prakriti, yet know my higher prakriti as consisting of all 
jivas [individual spirits], by which this world is sustained (7:5).
Prabhavananda: ÒYou must understand that behind this, and distinct from it, is 
199
That which is the principle of consciousness in all beings, and the source of life in 
all. It sustains the universe.Ó This verse is not easy to translate, because the word 
jivabhutam
 can mean either Òconsisting of spirit-beingsÓ or Òthe world of Spirit.Ó 
One means many spirits and the other only one Spirit. In truth, both are correct, as 

the universe exists solely through the presence within it of the many eternal, 
individualized consciousnesses. And of course it exists because it is the dream of 
BrahmanÐbut it is our dream, too. God and the spirits are existing in a sublime 

unity incomprehensible to any but the enlightened. The lower Prakriti is energy, but 
the higher Prakriti is consciousness.
Everything Krishna says is vastly important, including this point. It is rather 
common for people to think that if they know the enemy or the adversary well they 

are going to easily come out the victor or the master. But this is not true when 
considering Maya, for Maya of itself is nothing, though it has a source and an 

enlivener. True, it has cut itself o
"
 from that source and has taken on a kind of 
independent life of its own, but that is its own illusion catching up with itself. The 
bedrock truth of all things is that behind and separate from them is the Primal 

Purusha, the Supreme Consciousness that is inseparable from all beings and the 
very Principle of the existence of all things, including our own jivatman, our own 
individual Self. 
ÒThe immortal Self is the sun shining in the sky, he is the breeze blowing in 
space, he is the Þre burning on the altar, he is the guest dwelling in the house; he is 

in all men, he is in the gods, he is in the ether, he is wherever there is truth; he is 

the Þsh that is born in water, he is the plant that grows in the soil, he is the river 
that gushes from the mountainÐhe, the changeless reality, the illimitable!Ó (Katha 
Upanishad 2:2:2)
ÒHim the sun does not illumine, nor the moon, nor the stars, nor the lightningÐ
nor, verily, Þres kindled upon the earth. He is the one light that gives light to all. He 

shining, everything shinesÓ (Katha Upanishad 2:2:15, Mundaka Upanishad 2.2.10).
It is this twofold-yet-one Primal Being that must be known if we are to elude the 
snare of Maya and transcend its inßuence forever. We must always have in mind the 

fact that the Reality behind the deluding appearance is the InÞnite Self from which 

we draw our very existence. And I do not mean this in a merely intellectual fashion. 
It must be a knowing, a perception arising from the experience that is gained from 
intense sadhana alone.
Realize that these two prakritis are the wombs of all beings. Of this entire 
world I am the origin and the dissolution (7:6).
To know Maya truly we must know the Lord of Maya, Ishwara, for they are 
inseparably united. We must shake ourselves awake from the dream of separation. 
Part of knowing ourselves consists in experiential awareness of our origin: Prakriti 
united with Purusha. This is why the concepts of Heaven-Father and Heaven-

Mother are central to any intuition-based spiritual view. One without the other is 
nonsense. Even in the Upanishads which so emphasize the transcendent aspect of 
reality that can be symbolized as Father, the necessity of the Mother is found. (See 
200
the third chapter of the Kena Upanishad.)
As Prakriti the Parampurusha is the womb which brings all things into being 
and dissolves them as well. Sri Ramakrishna told of having a vision in which he saw 
a woman in labor give birth to a child and then after a short while eat it completely. 

At Þrst he was shocked, but then he realized that what he was seeing was a symbol 
of the ways of Prakriti. Expansion and contraction, manifestation and dissolution, 
beginning and endingÐall are manifestations of divine consciousness and Divine 

Power. This is why in the book of Revelation we Þnd: ÒI am Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the endingÓ (Revelation 1:8, 11; 21:6; 22:13).
The Original Cause
Than me there is nothing higher. All this creation is strung on me like 
pearls on a thread (7:7).
This means that there is no source or cause beyond Brahman, that all things 
proceed from It, that It is the substratum, the support, of all being, of all worlds. 
Brahman is the essential being of all. Therefore It is called the Sutratman, the 

ÒThread-Self,Ó with this verse in mind. Whatever its apparent character, everything 
we perceive or experience is ultimately Brahman alone. This is almost impossible to 
maintain as an intellectual concept throughout our daily life, but it can be 

experienced in meditation and carried over into our life. Without yoga the ideal of 
the Gita is unattainable. ÒTherefore be a yogi,Ó as Krishna counseled Arjuna.
And the Caused
Krishna develops these ideas, saying:
I am the taste within water, the radiance of the moon and the sun; the 
Pranava [Om] in all the Vedas, the sound in the ether and the manhood in 
men (7:8).
The universe is often spoken of in Indian scriptures as an ocean of potential 
existenceÐthe causal waters. Here its meaning is that God is the essence of the 

cosmos. Further, God is Light, of which the sun and moon are but hints. And he is 
also Sound (shabda) itself which arises from the element of ether (akasha). 

Therefore, as Vyasa concludes in the Þnal verse of the Brahma Sutras: ÒBy sound 
one becomes liberated [
anavrittih shabdai
].Ó
Also of importance is the factor 
paurusham nrishu
: manliness, potency, virility, and 
courage in human beings. This is very signiÞcant, for these words, unlike some 

expressions of the Gita, carry no connotation of gender, but of humanity in general. 
All of us, whether male or female in body, must manifest the essential powers of 

humanity, including the courage that such a manifestation requires. In other words, 
God is manifesting as the power and determination that is so needful for perfection 
in yoga.
Lest I seem in this commentary to put too much emphasis on yoga, please do 
not forget that at the end of every one of its chapters the Gita is described as ÒThe 

Science of the Eternal, the Scripture of Yoga.Ó
201
I am the pure fragrance in the earth, and the brilliance within Þre; the life 
in all beings, and the tapasya of ascetics (7:9).
Brahman is the very living earth and the yoga of yogis. God is present in tapas, 
so let us be perpetual tapaswins and be ever-present with God.
Know that I am the eternal seed of all beings, the intelligence of the 
intelligent, and the splendor of the splendid (7:10).
Since God is Òthe eternal seed of all beings,Ó there can be no other view than 
that all things, all beings, are part of God.
Desirable desire
I am the strength of the strong, free from desire and passion. I am the 
desire in beings that is according to dharma (7:11).
This Þnal clause is extremely important. Desire (kama) is spoken of unfavorably 
throughout the Gita, but it is impossible to live without desire. When we eat we 
desire to gain strength, when we study we desire knowledge, when we are kind we 
desire to comfort and sustainÐis this wrong? No. When Krishna speaks 

disapprovingly of desire he means an ego-centered force that clouds the intelligence 
and impels the will to unreason. In other words, he is speaking of desire that is not 
an act of intelligent will but a product of egoic passion, and therefore of delusion. 

But desire that does not abrogate or contravene our nature as the eternal Self is a 
manifestation of divinity in us and is to be honored and followed. This is important 
to know since ignoramuses in Asia (not just India) like to ask: ÒBut isnÕt the desire 

for enlightenment and liberation a desire, too?Ó In this way they hope to silence the 
wise who are exposing their ignorance in the form of their desires.
The gunasÐthreads of the net
Know that sattwic, rajasic and tamasic states of being proceed from me. 
But I am not in themÐthey are in me (7:12).
The major strands of the Mayic Net in its external constitution are the three 
gunas. And having said that I realize that nowhere in these essays have I really 
discussed the three gunas, waiting for the section where they are discussed by 

Krishna. But that will not be until the fourteenth chapter, so I had better outline 
them here.
In 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
 found on our websiteÐwhich I recommend you 
download or purchase and use for referenceÐthe following is the deÞnition for 

Guna:
ÒQuality, attribute, or characteristic arising from nature (Prakriti) itself; a mode 
of energy behavior. As a rule, when ÔgunaÕ is used it is in reference to the three 

qualities of Prakriti, the three modes of energy behavior that are the basic qualities 
of nature, and which determine the inherent characteristics of all created things. 

They are: 1) sattwaÐpurity, light, harmony; 2) rajasÐactivity, passion; and 3) tamasÐ
dullness, inertia, and ignorance.Ó
That covers it quite well. Some of the implications we can leave for comment 
202
when we come to the fourteenth chapter. There is no form of energy manifestation 
that cannot be put into one of these three categories, though they may also be of 
mixed character so that an object is only predominantly in one of these 
classiÞcations.
Nothing is random or Òunto itself.Ó Rather, everything proceeds from Brahman, 
for Prakriti itself is merely a ÒthoughtÓ of Brahman Who is one with all. All is 

contained in Brahman, but Brahman is not contained in them. This principle 

enables us to not fall into the error of thinking that God is nothing but the sum 
total of all things. Instead, all things are God, who yet remains separate from them. 
For Krishna next says:
All this world is deluded by the three states produced by the gunas. It does 
not perceive me, who am higher than these and eternal (7:13).
We, too, through the practice of yoga meditation must regain the truth of our 
being. For we also stand apart from all that we experience. We, too, are supreme 
and deathless. This is the glory of the Eternal Dharma: it tells us the plain truth 
about ourselves.
Breaking free from the net
Now we come back to the verse cited at the beginning, but in its complete form:
Truly this maya of mine made of the gunas is di
!
cult to go beyond. Verily 
only those who attain me shall pass beyond this maya (7:14).
How do we attain God? Not by religious acts or other pious gymnastics or by 
ascribing to dogmas. Since God is Consciousness, we take refuge by elevating and 
merging our consciousness into the divine consciousness, henceforth to live in 
Divine Unity. This is the goal. This is salvation. But in the meantime, Maya is truly 

divine, for its purpose is our evolution beyond its bonds.
The bound
But, since duality is fundamental to existence on this earth, there are those who 
do not break through Maya, for they do not take refuge in the divine consciousness 
that is really their own consciousness. Rather than move upward into the light, they 

burrow down and down into the dark. Of them Krishna says:
Evil-doers, the lowest of men, bereft of knowledge by maya, do not seek 
me, being attached to (existing within) a demonic mode of existence (7:15).
A ladder, a stairway, and even a mountain have one thing in common: they can 
be ascended or descended. So it is with the cosmos, with Maya, the shared dream of 

both God and sentient beings. Those who do wrongÐespecially those who 

knowingly do wrongÐbecome ever more 
willfully
 deluded by Maya (we all know 
people who fool themselves). Since they are resisting the sole purpose of human 

incarnationÐascent in consciousnessÐthey are the lowest of beings, since they seek 

the lowest rungs of the evolutionary ladder. Such persons will never seek God, 
though some will be avowed atheists, others agnostics, others middling religious 
and others (the worst of all) zealously religious but without any spiritual 
203
consciousness or conscience whatsoever. Such persons, though in human form, live 
the life of demonsÐasuras: those who dwell in darkness. Since God is Light they are 
the truest atheists: those without God (
a Theos
).
204
Those Who Seek God
Among the virtuous, four kinds seek me: the distressed, the seekers of 
knowledge, the seekers of wealth and the wise (7:16).
Now a great deal of people think they are religious, that they Òseek the face of 
God,Ó but Krishna is presenting us with four broad categories of seekers.
The distressed
. The 
Artas
 means those who are intensely troubledÐbereft, a
#
icted, 
distressed, or su
"
ering. Wisely they seek for relief in God, rather than try to distract 
themselves or deny their problems. Nor do they fool themselves with the false 

answers and delusive things of the deluded world.
The seekers of knowledge
. The 
Jijnasus
 are those who desire knowledge and 
understanding, who really want to Þnd the answers to the why and wherefore of 

themselves and their life, past, present, and future. They both think and realize that 
there is more to themselves and to life than they presently know. Like Socrates, they 
know that they know virtually nothing. But they yearn to know, realizing that 

without spiritual knowledge they are adrift on the ocean of relative existence 
without any sure hope. They will be satisÞed with nothing less.
The seekers of wealth.
 The 
Artharthi
 are those who seek attainment and welfare, 
but not the temporary and changeable things of the world. They want something 

that lasts and cannot be lost. Right now they may not know it, but inevitably they 
will come to realize that they are really looking for God alone.
The wise
. A 
jnani
 is one in whom true wisdom has arisen in the form of spiritual 
intuition, and who now consciously and very actively seeks the knowledge of 

Brahman which is itself Brahmanirvana, the state of enlightenment in Brahman. In 

KrishnaÕs listing the jnani is not a perfect knower of Brahman, otherwise he would 
not be a seeker, but he is a knower who is impelled by what he knows to seek 
Supreme Knowledge and the Supreme Knower. It is only natural that Krishna would 

continue, saying:
The highest seeker
Of them, the wise man, ever united, devoted to the One, is pre-eminent. 
Exceedingly dear am I to the man of wisdom, and he is dear to me (7:17).
It is obvious from this verse that the jnani is a yogi, for he is devoted to God and 
to no other for two reasons. First, he values God above all else. Second he knows 
that God alone is real, that all else is unreal and therefore unworthy of his 
dedication. But his valuation is not an impersonal factoid. Rather, God is dear to 

him and he is dear to God. Priya means both ÒdearÓ and Òbeloved.Ó Actually, 
Krishna uses two words: 
atyartham priya:
 Òexceedingly dearÓÐeven Òextraordinarily 
dear.Ó So God Þlls the heart and mind of the jnani, just as God is fully intent on 
him. As Solomon sang: ÒMy beloved is mine, and I am hisÓ (Song of Solomon 2:16. 
See also 6:3 and 7:10).
205
Then Krishna tells us:
All these indeed are exalted, but I see the man of wisdom as my very Self. 
He, with mind steadfast, abides in me, the Supreme Goal (7:18).
The jnani does not love God because of what he can get from him. He loves God 
because he alone is worthy of his love. Our English word ÒworshipÓ was originally 
ÒworthshipÓÐaccounting someone worthy. We do not love God for any trait or deed, 
but for what he is in his essence. He is the ultimate and only Goal of all sentient 

beings. And devoted hearts alone reach that Goal.
Just a bit more: 

At the end of many births the wise man takes refuge in me. He knows: All 
is Vasudeva [He Who Dwells in All Things]. How very rare is that great soul 
(7:19).
Vasudeva is the Universal, All-Pervading God. The jnanis have ripened 
throughout many dedicated lives in which God alone has been their goal and refuge. 

For they know that God is all, the beginning and end. Rare indeed are such great 
ones. Yet, all of us are destined to be rare like them. Happy destiny!
206
Those Who Worship God and the Gods
Krishna has told us about the four kinds of God-seekers, extolling the man of 
wisdom, the jnani, and urging us to be the same. But he does not shunt aside those 
with lesser motivations, for they, too, embody the divine Self and from that 
perspective are of value, also. So he tells Arjuna:
Those whose knowledge has been stolen away by various desires resort to 
other gods, following various religious practices, impelled thus by their own 

natures [prakriti] (7:20).
The sole real purpose of human life is the realization of the Self and God. The 
path to this realization is the only true religion. In the beginning this was known, 

and human beings sought for realization and nothing less. But as ages passed, this 

insight faded away to be replaced by earthly desires. Not being able to get all they 
wanted materially, humansÐwho still retained a goodly portion of their original 
psychic perceptionÐbegan to resort to external powers to assist them in the desired 

gain. At Þrst they no doubt simply used their psychic understanding to manipulate 
the subtle levels of existence to manifest what they wanted, but when their psychic 
powers declined they had to resort to other intelligent beings that were not human, 

such as those who control the forces of nature. These beings became ÒgodsÓ to 
them. Also, humans formulated thought-forms, constructs of psychic energies that 
could respond to their wishes and provide them with what they wanted to gain or 

accomplish.
Both the natural and fantasy gods were fed by the wills of their votaries. In many 
places sacriÞces or o
"
erings were made to them from which they drew power. The 

more degraded humans even o
"
ered blood sacriÞce to beings of low evolution. 
These, too, drew power from such vile o
"
erings. The higher gods drew power from 
ritual worship, praisings, devotional acts, and such like. Images of the gods were 

made and sometimes energized as focal points by which the gods were contacted. 
The images themselves took on a kind of semi-life, even semi-consciousness.
In India, at the time of Krishna at least, the low spirits we may rightly call 
demons were not worshippedÐonly higher nature-guardians and thought-created 

entities that were of a benevolent and pure nature. It is those deities that Krishna is 
talking about when he says:
Whoever wishes to worship whatever form with faith, on him I bestow 
immovable faith. He who, endowed with this faith, desires to propitiate that 

form, receives from it his desires because their fulÞllment has been decreed 

by me (7:21-22).
The Sanskrit is a bit tricky to untangle, but Prabhavananda no doubt has put it 
best: ÒBut it does not matter what deity a devotee chooses to worship. If he has 

faith, I make his faith unwavering. Endowed with the faith I give him, he worships 
that deity, and gets from it everything he prays for. In reality, I alone am the giver.Ó
207
This is the expression of the great care and mercy of God. Unlike the false gods 
created by egoistic mankind, the true God wills only our welfareÐeven physicallyÐ
and will foster our reaching out to something beyond ourselves even if that 
reaching is done ignorantly and short-sightedly. He is willing to do this, for in this 

chapter he has already told us: ÒI am the desire in beings that is according to 
dharmaÓ (7:11). It is these things alone that he will give to those who worship 
mistakenly. The evil things gained from other worship comes from the corrupt will 

of man, whether alone or linked with a demonic intelligence or force.
Answered prayersÉ
We can understand from all this that answered prayers tell us nothing about the 
validity of a worshipperÕs worship. Prayers are answered in many cases by the 
released will-power of the worshippersÐpower they have no idea is really theirs. 

Some prayers are answered by natural spirits (even those of the dead), and some by 
God (Ishwara) or those he has designated to foster humanity in this way. So the fact 
that we get what we want is no proof at all that we are praying in either the right 

way or to the right deity. ÒThe god that answers prayer is the true God,Ó was a 
slogan in the propaganda a friend once sent me about her new-found false religion. 
She was wrong, as these verses from the Gita show.
ÒAnd Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and 
troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that 

good part, which shall not be taken away from herÓ (Luke 10:41, 42). The validity 

of a religion is shown only when the Òone thing needfulÓ is sought, when the seeker 
seeks enlightenment through the realization of his Self and GodÐand does attain it. 
Miraculous powers in a person are as meaningless as the answered prayers of 

common religion. The real miracle a Master performs is the awakening of 
consciousness in those who come in contact with him. And that takes place only in 
those already evolved to the point where they can be awakened.
It is true that when it furthers the divine plan for humanity masters will work 
miracles, but they are only secondary, and the masters and their true disciples know 

that well. In speaking of the miracles of his guru, Swami Kaivalyananda 

(Kebalananda) told the future Paramhansa Yogananda: ÒThe numerous bodies 
which were spectacularly healed through Lahiri Mahasaya eventually had to feed the 
ßames of cremation. But the silent spiritual awakenings he e
"
ected, the Christlike 

disciples he fashioned, are his imperishable miraclesÓ (
Autobiography of a Yogi
, 
Chapter Four).
An unexpected ÒpaymentÓ
But Krishna is not Þnished, for being the embodiment of Divinity, of Truth itself, 
his intention is to make full disclosure on this subject. His next words, then, are 
these:
But temporary is the fruit for those of small understanding. To the gods go 
the worshippers of the gods; those who worship me come unto me (7:23).
208
Swami Prabhavananda: ÒBut these men of small understanding only pray for 
what is transient and perishable. The worshippers of the devas will go to the devas. 
So, also, my devotees will come to me.Ó
There are two ßaws in ignorant worship. One is that only the Òtransient and 
perishableÓ can be gained by such worshippers. Moreover, since they desire and 

identify with the transient and perishable, they themselves seem to become just as 
transient and perishable as well. The other ßaw is even less desirable: After death 

the votaries go into the subtle worlds inhabited by their gods and serve them just as 
they had been served by having their prayers answered. In some astral regions they 
truly do become servants of their gods, trapped and enslaved. That is simply the 

manifestation of the law of karma. Having incurred debts by being given the objects 
of their desires, the unfortunates must now serve the gods and do what they will.
There are many worlds where various kinds and levels of ÒgodsÓ abide. Some are 
pleasant, some merely boring, and others miserable and Þlled with pain and malice. 

According to the kind of god worshipped, so will be the fate of the devotees. But 
this one thing is common to all: they are imprisoned in those worlds and unable to 

escape until released through payment of their karmic debt. And then they fall back 
down to earth, helpless as before.
The fate of those who go into the worlds of even the positive gods is also seen as 
unfortunate, for of them Krishna says later in the ninth chapter: ÒThese men pray 

for passage to heaven, thus attaining the realm of Indra, home of the happy; there 
they delight in celestial pleasures. Pleasures more spacious than any earthly they 

taste awhile, till the merit that won them is all exhausted: then they return to the 
world of mortalsÉ hungry still for the food of the senses, drawn by desire to 
endless returning.É such men must return to life on earth, because they do not 

recognize me in my true nature. Those who sacriÞce to the various deities, will go 
to those deities. The ancestor-worshippers will go to their ancestors. Those who 
worship elemental powers and spirits will go to them. So, also, my devotees will 

come to meÓ (9:20, 21, 24, 25.ÐPrabhavananda).
The good part
At the end of this section from chapter seven as well as that of chapter nine we 
are told a wonderful thing: Òthose who worship me come unto me.Ó Those who 
worship the Absolute Being through striving to live a puriÞed life, engaging in 

spiritual disciplines leading to liberation and enlightenment (most importantly, 
meditation), will surely go to God by becoming irrevocably united with Supreme 
Consciousness, free forever from all bonds, conditionings, and limitations. Ever 

abiding in the consciousness of I AM, they will have attained the inÞnite being of 
Satchidananda, inÞnite Existence-Consciousness-Bliss itself. When a yogi has that, 
Ònothing further remains remains to be known here in the worldÓ (7:2).
209
The Veil in the Mind
Krishna has spoken of the strong net of Maya that is di
!
cult to break through. 
Now he speaks of Maya as a veil that darkens and blinds the minds of those over 
whom it lies. We must keep in mind that in this sectionÐas in most othersÐhe is 
speaking both as the Supreme Self and the individual Self. So not only is God 

speaking to us, so is our own divine spirit.
Mistaken views
Though I am unmanifest, the unintelligent think me entered into 
manifestation, not knowing my higher being which is imperishable and 
unsurpassed (7:24).
This verse tells us about traits of Brahman and the jiva (individual spirit) that 
are not perceived by the ignorant.
Unmanifest
. Spirit is never manifest in the sense of becoming touched by material 
existence, or any form of relative existence at all. It is also unperceivable to the 
senses, the mind, and the intellect. Only that part of us which is forever beyond 
those three faculties can come into contact with Spirit and know it.
Entered into manifestation
. 
Vyaktim apannam
 actually means Òfallen into 
manifestationÓ or Òchanged into manifestation,Ó the meaning being that God has 

lessened and limited himself through manifestation. But that is not the reality. God 

does not become material or changeable by manifesting the cosmos. And we 
ourselves are not human beings although we are experiencing humanity in an 
objective manner in which illusion has become distorted into seemingly subjective 

experience. There is nothing but Brahman. To mistake ourselves for anything less is 
deadly to us.
Imperishable
. Although God is the source of all things, manifesting as all things, 
seated in the heart of all and experiencing all things, He is not in any way changed 

or a
"
ected by that. Nor are we, mirroring the Divine Being on the limited and Þnite 
level.
Unsurpassed
. Both we and God transcend all relative existence, including that of 
mortal bondage, which is the state of all humanity. It is our nature to be beyond all 

the dreams of illusion which we call Maya.
Those who mistakenly assume di
"
erently as to the nature of God and 
themselves are impelled into a multitude of delusions from which arise a myriad 

false and impossible hopes and fears. Misunderstanding both themselves and God, 

they stumble, and often crawl, through a wilderness of spiritual and material death. 
Only when they emerge from it, as they all shall in time, will they realize the 
enormity of their ignorance and su
"
ering. Then they will rejoice at having emerged 

from unreality into reality, from darkness into light, from death into immortality. 
For they and God have ever been the Real, the Light, the Immortal.
210
The unseen seer
ÒIf God exists, why canÕt I see him?Ó is a sensible question. Krishna tells us 
exactly why:
Veiled by Yogamaya, I am not manifest to all. This deluded world perceives 
me not who am unborn and imperishable (7:25).
God is veiled by Maya; but Krishna uses the expression Yoga Maya. This is a key 
concept of Sankhya philosophy. Yoga Maya is, of course, the power of Maya, of 
divine illusion. Those who are deluded by it cannot perceive the Divine Presence 
within all. Some do perceive higher realities, at least in a kind of dim intuition, in 
contrast to the majority of people. They have evolved to such a point that the inner 

eyes and ears have become at least partially opened on their inner, higher levels. But 
those blinded by Yoga Maya identify with the human body and condition and 
experience nothing but change within and without. They cannot possibly perceive 

or even guess the realities that lie within themselvesÐincluding the Divine Presence.
But why does Krishna say 
Yoga 
Maya? What is yogic about it? Nothing. But yoga 
means union, and Krishna means that the mayic creation results when God 

ÒtouchesÓ or unites himself with Prakriti, the Universal Energy. Actually Sankhya 
says that God only approaches or becomes very near to Prakriti and it immediately 
seems to come to life, moves and begins to appear in many manifestations, all of 

which are Maya, Illusion, and not really Prakriti in its true nature any more than 
they are Spirit in manifestation.
I know the departed beings and the living, and those who are yet to be, but 
none whatsoever knows me (7:26).
Why is this? Because God is beyond relative being and can never be an object of 
intellectual knowledge. Since God is the Eternal Subject, he knows (perceives) all 
the waves that appear and disappear upon the ocean of being which he is. By his 
nature he knows all things, but ÒthingsÓ by their nature cannot know him. It is a 
matter of Who in contrast to What. We, being part of God, have the same capacity 

but in us the experience of ÒthingnessÓ has swallowed up awareness of our true 
nature. This condition is not native to us, so in time it will melt away and we will 
once more know truly. Of course we have to work at that, which is what yoga is all 

about. We can once again be established in our Self, and from that center we can 
come to know God who is at that center. That is why Jesus said: ÒBlessed are the 
pure (
catharos
: clear) in heart (at the center: 
kardia
): for they shall see 
GodÓ (Matthew 5:8).
The problem
Misery may not always love company, but it certainly 
has
 company, for Krishna 
now says:
By desire and aversion rising up through dualityÕs delusion, at birth all 
beings fall into delusion (7:27).
How could we not believe this world is real? Its pain and fear block out from our 
211
minds all other aspects of existence, draw our awareness totally outward into the 
material world, and imprison us there. Certainly that imprisonment is a delusion 
and not a reality, but we neither know that nor are capable of believing it when we 
Þrst hear of it. But it is not the world that is at fault. Uncomfortable as it may be to 

face, the fault lies in us, in our continually veering back and forth between the two 
poles of desire and aversion. I Want and I DonÕt Want push us back and forth and 
even morph into one another. Our minds become like a tennis ball, batted in 

opposite directions until they lose all perspective and orientation. As long as we are 
subject to these warring forces we can never know either peace or clarity of mind 
and heart.
The solution
The sole answer lies in changing ourselves, in establishing our consciousness in 
the right place. For Krishna tells Arjuna:
But those whose wrongdoing has come to an end, whose actions are 
righteous, freed from the delusions of the pairs of oppositesÐthey worship me 
with Þrm resolve (7:28).
Now this is most interesting. Mere philosophizing or theologizing will not clear 
up our dilemma. ÒThe truthÓ as verbal or intellectual formulations will avail 

nothing, either. Rather, it is what we actually do that will neutralize the forces that 
work against our progress. By right action we expunge the force of past negative 
actions.
The word 
vrata
, here translated Òresolve,Ó means a resolve in the sense of a 
resolution which manifests as a rule of conduct in right action. God-oriented 

thought and action is the only cure for the malady of bad karma and susceptibility 

to the forces of like and dislike, both of which spring from the ego alone. This is 
further underlined as Krishna continues:
Those who strive toward freedom from old age and dying, taking refuge in 
me, know Brahman totally, and know the Self and karma perfectly (7:29).
Old age (jara) and dying (marana) are inevitable processes of the material body, 
including the astral and causal bodies, but do not touch the spirit. The wise 
therefore strive toward the realization of Brahman, the Imperishable and Immortal 
Spirit of which they are a part.
Guru Nanak continually spoke of Òthe GodwardsÓ in his hymns. Krishna here 
tells us that those who are totally Godward, whose every thought, word, and deed is 

directed toward God with the intention of knowing and uniting with God, will 
indeed come to know God and their Self and the true nature of this world and that 

which lies beyond it. The relative and the absolute will all be known to them.
This will be no temporary high or psychic ßash that comes and goes, but:

Those who know me as the Primal Being [Adhibhuta] and the Primal God 
[Adhidaiva], as well as the Primal SacriÞce [Adhiyajna], they know me with 
steadfast thought also at the time of death (7:30).
These terms will be deÞned after the next verse. The idea here is that Brahman 
212
is all this in relation to relative existence and the evolution going on within it. 
Krishna is speaking here of the Ring of Return made perfect and complete.
213
The Big Picture
A friend of mine used to tell people: ÒYou will only get what you settle for.Ó He 
meant that if you will settle for little, that is what you will get. But if you will settle 
only for much, that will come to you. Apparently Arjuna held this same philosophy, 
for now he is going to ask some very vast questions. But Krishna will easily answer 

all these things in terms that millions throughout the ages will understand.
The questions
Arjuna said: O Supreme Spirit [Purushottama]: What is Brahman? What is 
the Primal Self [Adhyatma]? What is action? What is the Primal Being? What 
is the Primal God? What, and in what way, is the Primal SacriÞce here in this 

body? And how are you to be known at the time of death by the self-
controlled ones? (8:1-2).
Krishna will answer these, but here are the deÞnitions of all the technical terms 
in this verse as found in 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
:
Brahman
: The Absolute Reality; the Truth proclaimed in the Upanishads; the 
Supreme Reality that is one and indivisible, inÞnite, and eternal; all-pervading, 
changeless Existence; Existence-knowledge-bliss Absolute (Satchidananda); 
Absolute Consciousness; it is not only all-powerful but all-power itself; not only all-
knowing and blissful but all-knowledge and all-bliss itself.
Adhyatma:
 The individual Self; the supreme Self; spirit.
Karma:
 Karma, derived from the Sanskrit root 
kri
, which means to act, do, or 
make, means any kind of action, including thought and feeling. It also means the 
e
"
ects of action. Karma is both action and reaction, the metaphysical equivalent of 
the principle: ÒFor every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.Ó It is karma 
operating through the law of cause and e
"
ect that binds the jiva or the individual 

soul to the wheel of birth and death.
Purushottama:
 The Supreme Person; Supreme Purusha. 
Purusha:
 ÒPersonÓ in the 
sense of a conscious spirit. Both God and the individual spirits are purushas, but 

God is the Adi (Original, Archetypal) Purusha, Parama (Highest) Purusha, and the 
Purushottama (Highest or Best of the Purushas).
Adhibhuta:
 Primal Being; Primal Element; Primordial Matter. Also: Supreme 
Being and Supreme Element.
Adhidaiva:
 Primal God; Supreme God.
Adhiyajna:
 Primal SacriÞce; Supreme SacriÞce.
Brahman, Adhyatma, and karma
The Holy Lord said: The Imperishable is the Supreme Brahman. Its 
dwelling in each individual body is called the Primal Self; the o
"
ering in 
sacriÞce which causes the genesis and support of beings is called Karma (8:3).
214
Brahman is the supreme, unchanging Being, the eternal Fact of existence itself, 
the First to which all else is second. Since nothing can really be said about the 
transcendent Brahman, Krishna quickly passes on to that which we can 
comprehend, at least to some degree.
Adhyatma Þrstly is the principle of the indwelling Brahman in all beings as their 
Eternal Witness. But it is also the principle of the individual spiritÕs eternal 

distinction from Brahman which enables it to manifest and dwell in many forms in 

succession. The power which brings this embodiment about is karma in its 
fundamental nature. So from this we see that karma is not only a reaction, but the 
action that originates our coming into relative existence. Karma both initiates and 

maintains the rebirth process.
World, man, and God
Primal Being is perishable existence; the Primal God is the Supreme 
Divine Being; and I myself am the Primal SacriÞce (8:4).
I have pointed out previously that the Bhagavad Gita is an exposition of the 
Sankhya philosophy. Sankhya postulates the existence of three eternal entities: God, 
the individual spirit, and the Divine Creative Power within which the individual 
evolves. This verse is about them. The Primal Element, the Adhibhuta, is 

Parashakti, the Supreme Energy which manifests as the entire range of relative 
being, including all the forms assumed by sentient beings in their evolutionary 
pilgrimage within itself. The Primal Deity is the individual divine Self, the jivatman, 

the purusha which is moving up the ladder of Adhibhuta. The Adhiyajna, the Primal 
SacriÞce is Brahman itself, dwelling in the body [
dehe dehabhritam
] along with the 
individual Self.
The new idea presented in this verse is the concept that by entering into all 
beings as their Indweller God has become the Primal SacriÞce. Interestingly, the 
best elucidation of this idea is to be found in an esoteric Christian ritualÐthe Mass 

rite formulated by Bishop James I. Wedgwood, founder of the Liberal Catholic 
Church. As referred to previously, in one of the prayers God is addressed as him 
ÒWho, abiding unchangeable within Thyself, didst nevertheless in the mystery of 

Thy boundless love and Thine eternal SacriÞce breathe forth Thine own divine life 
into Thy universeÉ. Omnipotent, all-pervading, by that self-same SacriÞce Thou 
dost continually uphold all creation, resting not by night or day, working evermore 

through thatÉ enduring SacriÞce by which the world is nourished and sustained.Ó
God does not only sacriÞce himself by entering into limited modes of being, he 
also does so by willingly experiencing all the attendant changes and states of mind 

and body inherent in those conditions. Many people ask how God can allow people 
to su
"
er, not realizing that he is experiencing every pain and sorrow that all 
sentient beingsÐnot just humansÐare enduring. A dying person only experiences the 

su
"
ering and death of a single body, while God is experiencing the su
"
ering and 
death of an almost inÞnite number of bodies, all at the same time. There is no 
nuance of struggle or su
"
ering that God does not undergo right with us. Is this not 
215
a sacriÞce beyond all conception? The su
"
erings we undergo are for our eventual 
beneÞt; they are necessary for us. Yet God, who certainly needs no such, agrees to 
live in us and experience all that we experience. There could be no greater sacriÞce, 
no greater mercy, no greater love. So the next time we feel like complaining about 

our ÒfateÓ let us remember that God is enduring the same fate right along with us.
216
The Sure Way To Realize God
The easy way out
The attainment of liberation (moksha) is very simple in principle, and in 
practice, as well. Perhaps it is its simplicity that keeps people from attaining it. 
However it may be, Krishna explains the whole matter in a very simple manner:
At the time of death he who remembers me while giving up the body 
attains my BeingÐof this there is no doubt (8:5).
This is quite straightforward and easy to understand. The moment of death is 
perhaps the most important moment in our life, equalled only by the moment of 
birth. Dr. Morris Netherton, formulator of the Netherton Method of Past Life 
Recall, has found that the most signiÞcant factors in our life can be either birth or 

death trauma. The same would be true of positive experience during birth or death, 
which is why in India sacred mantras are recited during both timesÐat least by the 
spiritually intelligent. In this way the individual both comes into incarnation and 

leaves it accompanied by the remembrance of God.
The principle
Sanatana Dharma is never a matter of Shut Up And Accept What I Tell You. So 
Krishna explains to us how it is that if we are intent on the remembrance of God at 
the time of death we will go to God.
Moreover, whatever he Þxes his mind on when he gives up the body at the 
end, to that he goes. Always he becomes that (8:6).
All translators I know of have translated this verse to mean that whatever we 
think of at death, we will go to that thing, to whatever world in which it exists. The 
conclusion is then that if we remember God in life we will go to God at the time of 
death. Sounds, simple, easy, and certainly noble. But it is not true, as no simplistic 

formula is ever true. Sargeant alone, as far as I know, translates this verse correctly.
It is not ÒwhoÓ or ÒwhatÓ we merely think of intellectually that determines our 
after-death state, but the state of mind and being, the bhava, that we are in at the 

time of death. 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
 deÞnes bhava in this way: ÒSubjective state of 
being (existence); attitude of mind; mental attitude or feeling; state of realization in 

the heart or mind.Ó In short, it is our state of consciousness, and that is a matter of 

evolution, of buddhi yoga. Religiosity and holy thinking fail utterly; it is the level of 
consciousness that alone means anything.
When we die, we gather up all the subtle energies that comprise our astral and 
causal bodiesÐenergies that ultimately are seen to be intelligent thought-force. Then 

we leave the body through the gate (chakra) that corresponds to the dominant 
vibration of our life and thought. If our awareness has been on lower things we will 

depart through a lower gate and go to a low astral world. If we have been spiritually 
mediocre we will go to a middling world. But those who have made their minds and 
217
bodies vibrate to Divinity through authentic spiritual practice (tapasya) will leave 
through the higher centers. Those who have been united with God even in life will 
go forth to merge into Brahman forever. 
Some people pay attention to the Þrst part of this verse only, and think that they 
will cheat the law of karma which operates mentally as well as physically. They 

think that if at the moment of their death they will say a few mantras, then o
"
 they 
go to liberation (or at least heaven) no matter how they have lived their lives. 

Others, not quite so crass, decide that after having lived in a materialistic and 
spiritually heedless manner they will get religious during the last few years of their 
life and then be sure to be in the right state of mind and being as they die. But there 

is no cheating or cutting corners. What we sow that we reapÐnothing else.
The outspoken Ajahn Chah, a meditation master of the Thai Buddhist forest 
tradition, said that many people pester their grandmother at the moment of death, 

calling out: ÒSay ÔBuddho [Buddha],Õ grandma, say ÔBuddhoÕ!Ó ÒLet grandma alone 
and let her die in peace!Ó said Ajahn Chah. ÒShe did not say ÔBuddhoÕ during life, so 
she will not say ÔBuddhoÕ during death.Ó Sri Ramakrishna said that even at the 

moment of death a miser will say: ÒO! look how much oil you are wasting in the 
lamp! Turn it down.Ó He also said that you can teach a parrot to constantly say 
ÒRadha-Krishna!,Ó but if you pull its tail feathers it will only squawk. In the same 

way, when death pulls our Òtail feathersÓ we revert to our swabhava, our real state 
of mind and consciousness.
Although not of the spiritual sophistication of the Gita, the American country 
singer, Roy Acu
"
, wrote about the same idea in his song ÒWreck on the Highway.Ó
Who did you say it was, brother?
Who was it fell by the way?
When whiskey and blood run together,
Did you hear anyone pray?
I didnÕt hear nobody pray, dear brother,
I didnÕt hear nobody pray.
I heard the crash on the highway,
But I didnÕt hear nobody pray.
When I heard the crash on the highway
I knew what it was from the start.
I went to the scene of destruction
And a picture was stamped on my heart.
There was whiskey and blood all together
Mixed with glass where they lay
Death played her hand in destruction,
But I didnÕt hear nobody pray.
218
I wish I could change this sad story
That I am now telling you,
But there is no way I can change it,
For somebodyÕs life is now through.
Their soul has been called by the Master.
They died in a crash on the way.
And I heard the groans of the dying,
But I didnÕt hear nobody pray.
I didnÕt hear nobody pray, dear brother,
I didnÕt hear nobody pray.
I heard the crash on the highway,
But I didnÕt hear nobody pray.
Yogiraj Shyama Charan Lahiri often said: ÒIf you donÕt invite God to be your 
summer Guest, he wonÕt come in the winter of your life.Ó
In the area where I was born there was intense, virulent prejudice against the 
Roman Catholic Church and its members. One of my aunts conÞded to another 
aunt: ÒI go to a Protestant church, but I believe the Catholic religion is the right 
one. And when I realize that I am dying I will call for a priest and become a 
Catholic.Ó After many years, without any warning she passed into a coma, remained 

in that condition for six months and died without ever regaining consciousness. Her 
deathbed conversion plan never had a chance.
What we do not sow, we do not reap.
The lesson we must learn
There is a lesson here for all of us. As Jesus said: ÒLay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven,Ó in the realms of higher consciousness, Òfor where your 

treasure is, there will your heart be alsoÓ (Matthew 6:20, 21), even at the time of 
death.
Therefore at all times remember me, and Þght with your mind and 
intellect Þxed on me. Thus without doubt you shall come to me. With mind 

made steadfast by yoga, which turns not to anything else, to the Divine 

Supreme Spirit he goes, meditating on him (8:7-8).
This is the necessary bhava we must cultivate at all times, Þghting the battle of 
life in the conditions and situations dictated by our karma.
The Lord
We are not going to heavenÐwe are going to God! And we do not just believe in 
God, we intend to unite with God. So Krishna further says:
He who meditates on the Seer, the Ancient, the Ruler, subtler than the 
219
atom, Support of all, whose form is inconceivable and radiant like the sun and 
beyond darkness, at the time of death with mind unmoving, endowed with 
devotion and yoga power, having made the prana enter between the 
eyebrows, he goes to the Divine Supreme Spirit (8:9-10).
One of the gates to higher worlds is the Òthird eyeÓ between the eyebrows. 
During meditation the yogi sometimes Þnds his awareness drawn spontaneously to 

that point. It is the same at the time of death. The puriÞed and divinely-oriented life 

force (prana) automatically exits through that gate and goes to God, bearing us 
upward, even as the Egyptians pictured the freed soul ßying in a spirit-boat to the 
sun.
There is more:
That which the knowers of the Veda call the Eternal, which the ascetics 
free from passion enter, desiring which they live the life of brahmacharya, 
that path I shall explain unto you brießy (8:11).
To die right takes a lifetime of puriÞcation and preparation. Only those can enter 
into God whose bonds of desire are broken. To this end they constantly practice 

brahmacharyaÐcontrol of the senses and mind, which includes chastity/celibacy.
Going forth
Closing all the doors of the body, conÞning the mind in the heart, drawing 
his prana into the head, established in yoga concentration, uttering Om, the 
single-syllabled Brahman, meditating on me, departing thus from his body, he 

attains the Goal Supreme (8:12-13).
It is important to remember here that ÒheartÓ means the core of our 
consciousness, and not the physical heart or heart chakra. Even more important, 

Krishna is not referring to some kind of strenuous breathing exercise, but rather, 
the natural and automatic rising of the life-force into the higher centers of the 
brain.
A resume
Krishna then recaps all he has said in this section with these words:
He who thinks of me constantly, whose mind never goes elsewhere, for 
him, the constantly-united yogi, I am easy to attain. Coming to me, those 

great souls who have reached the highest perfection do not incur rebirth in 

this world, which is the impermanent home of su
"
ering. The worlds up to 
BrahmaÕs realm are subject to rebirthÕs return, but for him who attains to me 
there is no more rebirth (8:14-16).
220
Day, Night, and the Two Paths
Within relativity, dualityÐpositive and negativeÐis an absolute necessity for 
manifestation. Being alive, the cosmos requires that all things manifest this duality 
in a cyclic manner, that the positive and the negative polarities alternate in 
dominance. This can be seen in everything that lives. In fact, the more alive 

something is, the more evident are the alternating cycles. This principle manifests 
most obviously in the human body. The universe, being the body of God, also 
possesses this duality. Just as the image of God, the human being, breathes in and 

out to live, in the same way God breathes. The creation/manifestation of the 
universe is the exhalation of God, and its withdrawal/dissolution is the inhalation. 
Therefore Krishna says:
They know the true day and night who know BrahmaÕs Day a thousand 
yugas long and BrahmaÕs Night a thousand yugas long (8:17).
I will not weary youÐor meÐwith the mathematical basis for arriving at the 
numbers assigned to the ages, known as yugas. There are smaller ages within 
greater agesÐwheels within wheels. Anyhow, some say that a Òday of BrahmaÓ lasts 
4,320,000,000 years, and the ÒnightÓ is of equal length.
However, Paramhansa Yogananda, whose guru Swami Sriyukteswar Giri was a 
foremost expert in these calculations, says in his 
Autobiography of a Yogi
: ÒThe 
universal cycle of the scriptures is 4,300,560,000 years in extent, and measures out 

a Day of Creation or the length of life assigned to our planetary system in its 
present form. This vast Þgure given by the rishis is based on a relationship between 
the length of the solar year and a multiple of Pi (3.1416, the ratio of the 

circumference to the diameter of a circle). The life span for a whole universe, 
according to the ancient seers, is 314,159,000,000,000 solar years, or ÔOne Age of 
Brahma.ÕÓ
Krishna continues:
At the approach of BrahmaÕs Day, all manifested things come forth from 
the unmanifest, and then return to that at BrahmaÕs Night. Helpless, the same 
host of beings being born again and again, merge at the approach of the Night 
and emerge at the dawn of Day (8:18-19).
This is the situation of us all: compelled to manifest and compelled to return to 
unmanifestation in unending cycles. Will this ever end? Yes and No. It can end for 

those who wish it to end. For the rest, the coming and going will never end. 
Krishna will now show us how we can step o
"
 the ever-rotating wheel.
The Supreme Unmanifest
But there exists, higher than the unmanifested, another unmanifested 
Eternal which does not perish when all beings perish. This unmanifest is 
declared to be the imperishable, which is called the Supreme Goal, attaining 
221
which they return not. This is my supreme abode (8:20-21).
Although the germs of the cosmos are unmanifest when withdrawn and 
invisible, there is another Unmanifest that is the Supreme Being behind both 
manifestation and dissolution. This is the ultimate source of all, eternal and 

changeless, untouched by the ever-changing condition of relative existence. It is the 
Reality behind the cosmic illusion-drama. To attain that state of being is the highest 
attainment possible for Þnite beings, for it is InÞnity itself. Only those who reach 

that are freed from rebirth. For all the worlds from the highest to the lowest are 
subject to continual rebirth. The Unmanifest lies beyond all worlds, transcendent 
and changeless. And those who enter It become themselves transcendent and 

changeless.
This is the Supreme Being [Parampurusha], attained by one-pointed 
devotion alone, within which all beings do dwell, by which all this is pervaded 

(8:22).
Bhakti, the word here translated as Òdevotion,Ó means much more than mere 
emotion, but means devotion in the sense of being absolutely devotedÐdedicatedÐto 

the endeavor to unite with God. As Swami Sivananda said: ÒBhakti begins with two 
and ends in One.Ó (He also said: ÒDevotion is not emotion.Ó)
Yoga (union) in the highest sense must be the driving force of the aspirantÕs life, 
the point of reference around which he arranges his entire existence. Dabblers and 

Þddlers-around are not yogis, nor are those who are only intellectually intrigued by 
the possibility of divine union. The real yogis are those who live the words: ÒArise, 

awake, and stop not till the goal is reached.Ó God is the only Goal for them. And the 
search for God is their only life.
Two paths
Now I shall tell you of the times in which the yogis, departing at the time 
of death, return or do not return (8:23).
We have already seen in the Þrst part of this chapter that the state of mind and 
being in which we have habitually dwelt in life will determine the state we will 
attain at death. Here Krishna adds another factor, telling us that there are points in 

time that determine (or at least inßuence) whether or not the departing soul will 
return to earthly rebirth or pass on to evolve in higher worlds, perhaps even 
reaching the Absolute directly. Now he describes them:
Fire, light, daytime, the bright lunar fortnight, the six months of the sunÕs 
north path: departing then the Brahman-knowers go to Brahman. Smoke, 

nighttime, the dark fortnight, the six months of the sunÕs south path: thereby 

attaining the lunar light, the yogi returns again. Truly these two light and 
dark paths the world thinks to be eternal. By one he goes to non-return; by 
the other he returns again (8:24-26).
These paths, or bands of subtle energies on which the soul either ascends or 
descends, are spoken about in the Brihadaranyaka and Chandogya Upanishads. All 

commentators on the Upanishads and the Gita agree that these lists are symbolic of 
222
psychic energies or magnetism which draw the astral and causal bodies of the dying 
person upward or downward.
Various speciÞc interpretations are possible. For example, light and Þre 
represent clarity of consciousness, whereas night and smoke symbolize darkness 

and confusion of mind. The bright fortnight of the month and the northward 
movement of the sun refer to the upward orientation of the consciousness, and the 
dark fortnight and the southern solar movement indicate the habitual turning of the 

consciousness downward to materiality and ignorance. The moon is a symbol of the 
astral worlds in which earthly rebirth is inevitable, but the sun symbolizes those 
astral regions in which the soul is free of the compulsion to material re-

embodiment and can move on to higher levels of existence for continued evolution.
Obviously the two paths or streams of energy and consciousness are being taken 
by each one of us right here in our present life, and will continue, then, after our 

subtle bodies are separated from the physical at the process we call death, though it 
is really a movement into a di
"
erent mode of life. Therefore we should seriously 
analyze our life and see which stream we are moving in. For after death we only 

continue on just as we have been, although in the subtler realms the nature of our 
life becomes more evident.
In this world we can lie to ourselves and others, but not Òover there.Ó There the 
truth of things is revealed. Unless, of course, at the moment of death we merely fall 

into a psychic coma and know nothing until someone whacks us on the backside at 
the time of our next birth. This happens to a large percentage of human beings. It 

takes a deÞnite degree of evolution to go to either heaven or hell! As John Oxenham 
wrote: ÒThe high soul climbs the high way, and the low soul gropes the low, and in 
between on the misty ßats the rest drift to and froÓ as spiritual sleepwalkers.
No yogi who knows these two paths is confused. Therefore at all times be 
steadfast in yoga (8:27).
This implies that only the yogi follows the upward path to liberation. What 
about virtuous, sincerely religious people who are not yogis? We would assume that 
they, too, go the upward path, but Krishna concludes with these words:
Whatever meritorious fruit is declared to accrue from study or recitation 
of the Vedas, sacriÞce, tapasya, and almsgivingÐbeyond all these goes the yogi 

who knows the two paths; and he attains to the supreme, primeval Abode 
(8:28).
ÒTherefore, be a yogi!Ó (6:46).
223
The Supreme Knowledge
The Holy Lord said: To you who do not disbelieve I shall declare this most 
secret knowledge combined with realization, which having known you shall 
be free from evil (9:1).
What words! Yet they are purely wisdom, free from exaggeration or 
emotionality. The qualities of this great knowledge should be scrutinized by us who 

seek for it.
Most secret
Krishna calls this knowledge, not just secret (guhya), but most secret 
(guhyatamam). It is knowledge hidden from all but the knowers of Brahman, yet it 
can be spoken about to those who are approaching that knowledge. Essentially, 
Krishna is going to give us the knowledge that inevitably leads to that supreme 
knowledge. It is most secret because it is utterly incomprehensible and hidden to a 

consciousness that is not awakened and already puriÞed to a marked degree. For 
regarding those not awakened and not puriÞed it can justly be said: ÒThey seeing 
see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understandÓ (Matthew 13:13).
Disbelief
False religions and false teachers demand faith in the sense of unquestioning 
acceptance of doctrines and dogmas. Or they require a person to accept all their 
statements. ÒEvery word of the guru is a mantra.Ó What outrageous, egomaniacal 
bunk!!! Krishna is nowhere near this kind of fakery. When he says Òyou who do not 

disbelieveÓ he is using the word 
anasuyave
, which means to be free of contradiction 
or contention in the sense of willful contrarinessÐwhat in the American south is 

meant by the word Òcussedness.Ó Krishna is not blaming a sincere unacceptance of 

something, but rather a perversity and negativity of mind that causes a person to 
intentionally reject truth. It is a symptom of conscious evil, and a lot of people have 
it. That is why Saint Paul urged: ÒTake heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an 

evil heart of unbeliefÓ (Hebrews 3:12). This is not a matter of simple non-belief, as 
I have said. There is no wrong in not believing something, even if it proceeds from a 
limited understanding. It is the refusal to believe that is being spoken of here.
The same thing is found in the life of Jesus. We are told: ÒHe did not many 
mighty works there because of their unbelief.Ó Even: ÒHe marveled because of their 

unbeliefÓ (Matthew 13:58). It is evident that to Jesus unbelief was an actual 

psychic/spiritual force, not just a matter of ideas. The Greek word translated 
ÒunbeliefÓ is 
apistia
, which means to deliberately refuse to believe something from 
perversity of will, not sincerity of opinion. Such a crookedness of intention bars 
anyone from approaching the most secret knowledge.
224
Knowledge and realization
Krishna then tells us that this great knowledge is both intellectual knowledge 
(jnana) and the spiritual knowledge (vijnana) that comes from true spiritual 
experience. It is a knowing that is based on Being. In other words, it is the knowing 

of an adept yogi.
Liberation
Some people dearly love to know things, even if what they know has no practical 
use for them. But Krishna is not interested in mere intellectual curiosity which 
eventually will be seen as triviality of mind and heart. He is setting forth to us Òthis 

most secret knowledge combined with realization [understanding], which having 
known you shall be free from evil.Ó Such knowledge has a very practical and 
perceptible e
"
ect: liberation of the spirit from the evil of compulsive rebirth. A 

liberated yogi may be born thousands of times after his liberation, but always 
through his liberated will. Nothing whatsoever constrains or compels him. This, 
and this alone, is freedom. Krishna continues:
Royal knowledge, royal secret, this the supreme puriÞer, readily 
understood, dharmic, pleasant to practice, eternal (9:2).
Raja vidya, raja guhyam
Ðroyal knowledge and royal secret. This knowledge is royal 
because it enables those who possess it to become enthroned in the highest 

consciousness, giving them rulership over all that heretofore bound and compelled 

them. It is the supreme authority and power beyond and above which there is no 
authority or power, for it is a participation in the knowledge and power of God.
Supreme puriÞer
Such knowledge puriÞes us by dispelling all the shadows of ignorance, causing 
our mind to shine forth withÐand inÐthe Light of God. We often see people who 
have engaged themselves with only the external disciplines and beliefs of religion 
come to a very bad endÐa ÒfallÓ indeed. Many who have for decades Òfollowed in the 
ways of righteousnessÓ sink into a degradation undreamed of by them or those who 

know them. I myself have seen this sad phenomenon several times. In each case it 
was because, however sincere they may have been, they busied themselves with the 
externals of religion and did not gain inner, spiritual experience and knowledge. 

Thus, their inner disposition had never really changed. But the knowledge Krishna 
o
"
ers us is a transformative force, going far beyond Òforgiveness of sinsÓ and 
Ògetting right with God.Ó It is a transmutation from the baseness of material, egoic 

consciousness into the gold of spirit-consciousness. And I do not mean 
consciousness of spirit as an object, but the Consciousness that 
is
 Spirit. A religion 
that does not lead us to this supreme puriÞer is a cruel mockery that can end only 
in grief and shame.
Plainly intelligible
225
This great knowledge has as a prime characteristic its perfect intelligibility. It is 
indeed subtle and deep and exalted, yet it is clearly comprehensible to those who 
have evolved to the point needed to put it into practice.
Discontented with the simplistic beliefs of the religion I was born into, when I 
looked aÞeld I was appalled at the turgid meanderings of the labyrinth called 

ÒphilosophyÓ in the West. The writings of renowned ÒthinkersÓ convinced me that 
they might be able to think, but they certainly could not speak or write clearly and 

to the point. It was obvious to me that they were adored just for their 
incomprehensibility that was mistaken for profundity. No thank you!
When after years of dissatisfaction I read the Gita I was awed by the clarity of its 
concepts and its mode of presentation. I was ready for more. Having read in 

Autobiography of a Yogi
 that Shankaracharya was the greatest of Indian philosophers, I 
approached his books in the Hollywood Vedanta Bookshop with caution. Surely 

such a sublime philosopher would be beyond my understanding. Nobody likes to 
risk being proved a dummy, but I took the chance and opened the Þrst book at 
hand. Staggering revelation: it was beautifully comprehensible! More: it was 

gloriously simple, and equally profound. Happy amazement.
Although they should have been looked into before, I next turned to the 
Upanishads, the supreme heights of Indian thought. There I found profound clarity 

and profound simplicity that only eluded the ego-darkened mind. So I learned by 
this that those who really 
know
 can also communicate the clarity and purity of their 
knowing. This is because their knowledge comes from experience, not intellectual 
jugglings. Which is why in the Sanskrit original of this verse Krishna uses the 
expression 
pratyakshavagamam
: that which is clearly seen by the eyes. Of course, in 
this case it is the inner eyes that are being spoken about.
Righteous
This knowledge is also 
dharmyam
Ðaccording to the principles of righteousness, of 
dharma. This is a crucial point, for it is not unknown or even rare to come across 
scoundrels who claim that their spiritual realization has elevated them beyond or 
above the law of dharma. But Krishna tells us that the highest knowledge a
!
rms 

dharma, not violates it.
Easy to practice
Next Krishna tells us that this great knowledge cannot only be put into practical 
expression, it is actually 
susukham kartum
Ðeasy to practice. Now that is the fact. If we 
Þnd that it is not easy to practice or agreeable to usÐfor sukha also means pleasant 
and agreeable, even to the extent of giving us happinessÐthen something is very 
wrong. Either our ÒknowledgeÓ is false or corrupt or 
we
 are false and corrupt. Or 
perhaps both. We need to Þgure out what is wrong and make it right. Those who 
inoculate themselves with the wisdom of the Gita will be secure from catching the 
diseases of adharma, of unrighteousness. And they will Þnd that the way of dharma 
is for them a joyful and easy path.
226
Imperishable
The supreme truth is 
avyayam
; it is imperishable in the sense that once attained 
it cannot be lost or erodedÐit never fades away. Nor is it ever superseded or gotten 
beyond. It can never be lessened or changed. It is truly immortal. It is absolutely 

secure and abiding. On the other hand:
Those who have no faith in this dharma, without attaining me are reborn 
in the realm of death and samsara (9:3).
Krishna uses an interesting wordÐ
ashraddadhanah
, which means both not having 
faith and not giving faith. This second meaning refers to those who in their hearts 

know the truth but refuse to acknowledge and act upon it. This is a way of life for 

many people. But whichever it isÐnot having faith or refusing to act upon it (note 
the implication that faith and action are inseparable)Ðthe result is failure to attain 
union with God and a return to earthly incarnation, Òreborn in the realm of death 

and samsara.Ó
We must resolve to nevermore tread that sorrowful path again.
227
Universal Being
Finite minds cannot really comprehend the InÞnite. Yet, even a dim idea will be 
of inestimable value to them in their spiritual seeking. Krishna is now about to 
explain the fundamentals of InÞnite Being in relation to Þnite creation and the Þnite 
beings within it.
All-pervading Being
All this world is pervaded by me in my unmanifest aspect. All beings dwell 
within me, but I do not dwell within them (9:4).
It is a mistake to think of creation and Spirit as two layers or levels of reality like 
oil and water. Rather, Unmanifest Spirit (Avyakta) pervades everything. There is no 
point of existence where Spirit is not. On the other hand, there is the vast realm of 
Spirit in which there is nothingÐor no thingÐat all. Spirit pervades matter, but 
matter does not pervade Spirit. Nevertheless, there is an intimate connection 

between the two, for all relative existence exists within the Unmanifest.
The word translated ÒdwellÓ is 
sthani
, meaning a place of residence. Krishna is 
saying that all beings abide in the Unmanifest, for It is the basis of their existence. 

Without the Unmanifest they would not exist. But the Unmanifest Spirit does not 
depend upon those beingsÐIt would remain unchanged if they ceased to exist.
KrishnaÕs purpose is to give us an order of priority. Spirit is not only Þrst, it is 
all-encompassing. If we attain Spirit we will attain mastery over relativity. But if we 

only possess relative matter we will be nothing in the ultimate sense.
And yet beings do not dwell within me: behold my Divine Yoga. Sustaining 
beings and yet not dwelling in them, I myself cause all beings to come into 

manifestation (9:5).
Krishna is giving a profound teaching here. Created things, including relative 
existence itself, never touch Spirit. In the same way, our energy bodies never touch 

our Self.
If that is so, then how does creation exist? For I have said that it not only exists, 
it exists within God (Brahman). Creation is also called MayaÐCosmic Illusion. 

Creation exists within Brahman as a mirage, an illusion. A mirage is real, but what 
is seen (water, buildings, etc.) is not. Maya is like a motion picture. The epic begins, 

unfolds, and ends, but really nothing has taken place. We were just watching 
images that were only light moving on a background. It was all an illusion. We 
could not see the motion picture if it was not projected onto a neutral background. 

We see the movie of Maya projected onto the background of Consciousness. 
Neither the background of the movie screen or that of Consciousness are in anyway 
really touched or a
"
ected by the images. But without the screens there would be no 

movie or creation.
228
Moving within the Unmoving
As mighty winds move everywhere, yet always dwell in the ether, know 
that even so do all beings dwell within me (9:6)
Incredible as the continual changes in creation are, and the untold numbers of 
life-dramas perpetually unfolding with it, it all takes place within God, the sense of 
independence and separation being totally illusory. The realization of this frees us 
from all fear.
Relativity cannot exist without an inÞnite chain of dualities. Creation takes place 
in a series of manifestations and dissolutions. Krishna described this in the 

previous chapter. Referring back to this, he says about all sentient beings: 
At the end of a kalpa, all beings merge into my Prakriti: at the beginning of 
another kalpa, I myself send them forth (9:7).
At the end of a kalpaÐDay of BrahmaÐall those remaining in relativity merge into 
the primordial matter, or prakriti, and enter a state of dreamless sleep. Then, when 
an equally long Night of Brahma has ended, they emerge from that sleep and 
continue on their evolutionary way.
Resting on my Prakriti, I send forth again and again this entire multitude 
of beings, helpless under PrakritiÕs power (9:8).
This evokes the popular image of Shesh-Narayan (Vishnu) resting upon 
(sometimes rising from) the ocean of primal energy (prakriti) as the source of all 
worlds and the beings within them. All beings are ÒhelplessÓ in this process 
because they have no will or choice in the matter, only the impetus of their karma 

from previous lives.
The divine actor
The Divine is at the root of all action, and without the Divine no action can take 
place. Yet Krishna says:
And these acts do not bind me, sitting as one apart, indi
"
erent and 
unattached in these actions (9:9).
The same is true of our immortal Self. Spirit is never touched, but is the silent, 
actionless witness of all that goes on.
How, then, do we have karma? We do not. But within the dream of Maya we 
experience it as such. Consider how in a dream you do so many things and undergo 
the consequences, yet it is only images, unreal. I have heard of people actually 

experiencing pain or nausea after awakening from dreams in which pain or nausea 
occurred. God has given us these dreams to teach us the truth about our greater 
span of life on earth. As PrabhavanandaÕs very interpretive translation says: ÒDo not 

say: ÔGod gave us this delusion.Õ You dream you are the doer, you dream that action 
is done, you dream that action bears fruit. It is your ignorance, it is the worldÕs 
delusion that gives you these dreamsÓ (5:14).
Let us awake!
229
MayaÐIts Dupes and Its Knowers
Maya does it all
With me as overseer Prakriti produces both the animate and the 
inanimate; because of this the world revolves (9:10) .
Sankhya philosophy says that prakriti is inert by nature, but by the mere 
proximity of purushaÐon both the cosmic and individual levelsÐprakriti moves and 
produces all that exist. So even though the spirit is the observer, and even in some 
ine
"
able way the controller, still the only ÒcreatorÓ is prakriti. Except for the spirits, 

prakriti is the sole source of all without exception. Both the living and the dead are 
made from the same substance. In fact, the di
"
erentiation is only one of movement 
or non-movement. The entire drama is the play of prakriti. When we realize this 

division we can begin to get a perspective on ourselves within this world and the 
process we are experiencing as life.
The blind, helpless, and hopeless
The deluded despise me dwelling in human form, not knowing of my 
higher being as the Great Lord of all beings (9:11).
The foolish daily encounter divinity in themselves and in all that is around 
them. But, being blind, they stumble on by unaware, knowing nothing at all about 
themselves or othersÐand usually not caring, either, despising both themselves and 

others, and often denying the very existence of their true Self.
Cut o
"
Ðat least in perceptionÐfrom their own essential being, what can be their 
fate?
Those of vain hopes, vain deeds, vain knowledge, without intelligence, 
abide in the delusive nature of rakshasas and asuras (9:12).
They are not just deludedÐthey are the source, the producer, of their delusion. 
Their hopes, actions, and seeming knowledge are vain because they are based on 
delusions. They live instinctually and sensually, unthinking. Their nature manifests 
the qualities of rakshasas and asuras. Rakshasas are cannibal demons, and we 

continually encounter people who devour life rather than live it. Asuras are willful 
dwellers in darkness. As Jesus said: ÒMen loved darkness rather than light, because 
their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh 

to the light, lest his deeds should be reprovedÓ (John 3:19, 20). But not all are like 
this. So Krishna says:
But those great souls that abide in their divine nature, worship me single-
mindedly, knowing me as the eternal Origin of beingsÉ (9:13).
It is necessary to be good, but the good must then progress on to become 
godlike, to be a deva, a Òshining oneÓ Þlled with the Divine Light. Fixing their mind 
on God they make themselves living o
"
erings. That is why the Manu Smriti (Laws 
of Manu) says that the greatest sacriÞce is the o
"
ering of ourselves 
230
(purushamedha). And Patanjali says that samadhi is attained by o
"
ering our lives to 
God (Ishwarapranidhana). Such persons live in the awareness of God:
Always glorifying me and striving with Þrm vows, bowing to me with 
devotion, always steadfast, they worship me (9:14).
This is a description of true devotion (bhakti), free from emotionalism and 
childish dependency.
Three views of God
But there is the approach of wisdom (jnana), which Krishna outlines thusly:
And others, sacriÞcing by the sacriÞce of knowledge, worship me as One 
and Manifold, variously manifested, omniscient (9:15).
This is very important because it has become the vogue to insist that only one 
way of viewing God is either right or the best. Krishna, however, states here that 

there are two legitimate ways the jnanis worship God: as absolute Unity and divine 
Diversity. Even those who prefer to look upon God as One will yet consider that the 
One has manifested in countless modes, omniscient and omnipresent in all. Both 

views are means to reach God. We must keep this in mind and not fall into the 
laziness of simplistic thinking in these matters.
God is all
I am the ritual, I am the sacriÞce, I am the o
"
ering, I am the herb, I am the 
mantra, I am the ghee, I am the Þre, and the pouring out into the Þre (9:16).
Over and over in the Gita it is pointed out that ritual is greatly inferior to yoga 
and wisdom. Yet, Krishna states that God is embodied in all those things, that they 
are the presence of God. They may be gone beyond, but they are not to be despised.
I am the Father and Mother of this world, Establisher, Grandfather, the 
object of knowledge, the PuriÞer, the Omkara (Om), the Rig, Sama, and Yajur 

Vedas (9:17).
In relation to creation God has three aspects: one transcendent and two 
immanent. This is the basis for the doctrine of the Trinity as taught by Jesus, 

however far contemporary Christianity has drifted from the original understanding. 

God is immanent in creation as both the guiding intelligence and the creative 
energyÐthe divine Father and Mother. Transcending these two aspects is the 
Unmanifest Absolute which can symbolically be called the Great Father, 
Pitamaha
. 
ÒGrandfatherÓ is not really a very satisfactory equivalent since the connotations are 
just too human and folksy.
I am the Goal, the Sustainer, the Lord, the Witness, the Abode, the Refuge, 
the Friend, the Origin, the Dissolution, the Foundation, the Treasure house 

and the Eternal Seed (9:18).
The Gita is absolutely perfect in expressing God through words.
As the sun I radiate heat; I withhold and send forth rain; I am immortality 
and death; being and non-being am I (9:19).
231
Round trip ticket!
The eighteenth verse indicates that God is the ultimate Goal. Wanting to help us 
to attain that Goal, Krishna now speaks of the way that falls short of the Goal.
The knowers of the three Vedas, the Soma drinkers, puriÞed of sins, 
worshipping by sacriÞces, seek the goal of heaven; they, the meritorious, 
attaining the world of Indra, enjoy divine, heavenly pleasures of the gods. 
Having enjoyed the vast heaven-world, with merit exhausted, they re-enter 

the world of mortals. Thus, carrying out the injunctions of the three Vedas, 
desiring objects of desire, going and coming from birth to birth, they obtain 
them (9:20-21).
Heaven is a trap, and the desire for heaven is the bait. For heaven keeps us from 
the only Goal: God. Those who go to heaven are the righteous, so Krishna says, but 

there is more for us than goodness, namely 
Godness
. Since the Being of God 
transcends all relativity, so must we, and heaven is very much a matter of relative 
existence. As Krishna points out, heaven is desired only by those who hunger for 
sensory enjoyments, impelled by desireÐand thereby hurled again and again into 

earthly rebirth. At the root of all is ego.
Eternal security
Those men who single-mindedly direct their thoughts to me, worship me. 
For them who are constantly steadfast I bestow what they lack and preserve 
that which they possess (9:22).
This last clause is not about earthly or heavenly possessions, but about spiritual 
attainments.
Those yogis who steadfastly Þx their minds on God without wavering or 
slacking o
"
, will Þnd all their lacks being Þlled up and their present attainments 
preserved. They will remain with God forever, even if they should take up a human 

body for some higher purpose.
232
Worshipping the One
Krishna now states quite simply:
Even those who with devotion worship other gods also worship me, 
though with a mistaken approach (9:23).
The meaning is clear: there are no Òother godsÓÐthere is only the One who is 
being worshipped through all revealed names and forms.
ÒEven those who worship other gods with faith, also worship me, though they 
do so in ignoranceÓ (SargeantÕs translation). The word Sargeant translates as Òin 

ignoranceÓ is 
avidhipurvakam
. It literally means Ònot according to the rulesÓ or even 
Òwithout/outside the rules.Ó The idea is that these people do not know or 

understand how to worship God because they do not know or understand the 

nature of God. Other possible termsÐignorantly, incorrectly, mistakenly, improperly, 
inappropriately, inappositely, inaptly, ineptly, haphazardly, irregularlyÐeither express 
a value judgment or add an extra meaning or attitude the Sanskrit does not include. 

This is good to keep in mind.
In very truth there is a Science of Religion, and that has been perfected in India. 
When those of other religions intuitively follow that science, things work exactly 

right and spiritual awakening and growth occur. However, since that science is just 
stumbled upon by the questing souls, and is not an integral part of those religions, 
the science is quickly, even instantly, lost. But since it is the bedrock foundation of 

Sanatana Dharma it endures through the ages, though often neglected by 
individuals. But once the eternal rules are followed, all is well.
The Þne print
The paramount idea is that all are worshipping GodÐthere is no one else to 
worship:
Truly I am the Enjoyer and Lord of all sacriÞces; but because they do not 
know me in truth they fall back into rebirth in this world (9:24).
This is not a matter of holding a mistaken intellectual conception of God, but of 
not directly perceiving God as he truly is. It is necessary for us to see God in his 
pure Being, for only then will we truly see our own Self and thereby be enabled to 
unite with God and attain total liberation in Spirit.
God sees all things Òin truthÓ at all times. We do not, but it is necessary for us 
to do so, as explained in the previous sentence. Seeing God in truth is not an 

experience but a state of being, a state of identity with God. I am making such a 

point of this so we will not slip back into the dogmatizing and theologizing outlook 
of externalized religion.
The import of this verse is thoroughly mystical and thoroughly practical. 
Krishna is telling us that those who do not 
know
 God cannot 
go
 to God. No amount 
of reading sacred texts will help us, nor will all kinds of devotional and emotional 
233
e
"
usions or multitudes of good deeds. We must ascend in consciousness to the 
heights of divine experience and be united forever with God. All the religiosity in 
the world is irrelevant here. YogaÐperfect unionÐalone is the means and the goal. 
Without yoga nothing is possible. It is not a matter of what religion or philosophy 

we hold, but a matter of evolution of consciousness. As the Gita says, we must 
become yoga-yuktaÐunited to God through yoga. We must never lose sight of this 
fact.
Many pathsÐmany goals
There are many paths and just as many goals. That is why Krishna says:
Those who are devoted to the gods go to the gods. Those who are devoted 
to the ancestors [pitris] go to the ancestors. Those who are devoted to the 

spirits [bhutas] go to the spirits. Those who are devoted to me surely come to 

me (9:25).
Three terms are used in this verse: devas, pitris, and bhutas. Devas are the 
demigods presiding over various powers of material and psychic nature. Pitris are 

ancestors or other departed human beings. Bhutas are non-human spirits of various 
sorts, some of them low-level nature spirits such as Òelementals.Ó Others are 
earthbound human spirits, and quite a few are beings of completely other streams 

of evolutionÐof other creations, evenÐthat have somehow wandered into our 
universe and gotten trapped here. All of these may be either positive, negative, or 
neutral.
Those who occupy themselves with these beings will go to their astral regions 
after death and eventually return to earthly life. But those who orient their minds 

toward the InÞnite will go to the InÞnite. Even if they do not attain full union with 

God while here on earth, they will escape rebirth, graduate from the earth plane, 
and go to a higher world from which they will reach God after completing their 
evolutionary development. Alternately, they will come back to earth in a family of 

yogis and be impelled toward seeking union with God. ÒThere he regains the 
knowledge he acquired in his former incarnation, and strives from thence once 
more toward perfectionÓ (6:43).
We should step back to the fourth chapter of the Gita. There Krishna says: ÒIn 
whatever way men resort to me do I thus reward them. It is my path which men 

follow everywhereÓ (4:11). Is this a contradiction to what he has now said regarding 

the worship of relative beings instead of the Absolute? No, because even that 
worship will eventually lead to something higherÐeven if only through 
disillusionmentÐuntil the questing soul learns to worship God alone.
234
Going To God
Instead of getting to heaven at last, IÕm going all along!
ÐEmily Dickinson
Turning the mind toward God
Since it is our nature to return to God it is a simple matter to do so. Fixing the 
mind on God is the essential thing. Therefore Krishna now outlines the way.
Whoever o
"
ers to me with devotion a leaf, a ßower, a fruit, or water, I 
accept that o
"
ering of devotion from him whose heart is pure. (9:26)
Devotion is the key to uniting our heart to God as the Þrst step of The Way 
Back. It is usual in India to o
"
er ßowers, fruit, and water in worship, and Krishna 
recommends this. But there is much more to devotion than this, so he continues:
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you o
"
er in sacriÞce, 
whatever you give, whatever tapasya you practice, do that as an o
"
ering to me 

(9:27).
The idea here is quite clear: 
Everything in our life must be o
!
ered to God
, must be 
looked upon as steps in the pathway to God. If there is anything in our life that 

cannot be rightly o
"
ered to God, then it should be eliminated. This is an important 

guideline. So often people want to know what they should do to gain peace of mind, 
but rarely do they inquire as to what they should 
stop doing
 to gain peace of mind.
Thus shall you be freed from the bonds of actions producing both good 
and evil fruits. Steadfast in the yoga of renunciation and totally liberated, you 

shall come to me (9:28).
The only karma we should have is God-karma! This will occur if we continually 
keep our mind immersed in the awareness of God.
GodÕs favor?
Often in religious writings we Þnd the idea that if we pay attention to God, he 
will pay attention to us; that if we are devoted to God, God will be concerned with 
us. In other words, we can control how God reacts to us. Not likely! It is true that 

God must hold a special place in our life, but that will not make us Òspecial friendsÓ 
of God. There is no You Be Nice To Me And I Will Be Nice To You bargains with 
God. Otherwise he would be as changeable and undependable as are we. To free us 

from these illusions Krishna next says:
I am the same to all beings. There is no one who is disliked or dear to me. 
But they who worship me with devotion are in me, and I am also in them 

(9:29).
SamoÕham sarvabhuteshu
, can equally mean ÒI am the same 
to
 all beingsÓ and ÒI 
am the same 
in
 all beings.Ó Both meanings are intended here, I feel sure, for one 
explains the other. God is the same to all beings because he is the unifying element 
within all beings. So all beings are equal in essence. Since God sees the potential in 
235
all beings, with the knowledge that all without exception shall realize that 
potentialÐand also that when the potential is realized all will be in exactly the same 
spiritual statusÐthere can be no question of God looking di
"
erently on anyone. To 
start with, he sees himself within all. For him the beginning, middle and end of our 

evolutionary journey are simultaneous. There is no possibility of him reacting 
di
"
erently to di
"
erent beings, nor even of acting di
"
erently to a particular being 
according to the stage of his journey at any moment.
ÒBut they who worship me with devotion are in me, and I am also in them.Ó 
Nevertheless there are di
"
erences between beings, but only from their side. Those 

who worship God in their hearts through an attitude of reverence and devotion are 

enabled to feel God within them and themselves within God. No one can ever be 
outside of God in actuality, but many are those who through delusionÕs darkness 
cannot perceive their existence within God and GodÕs existence within them. In 

their consciousness there is no God, even though they are ever intimately known to 
God. Just as a person will starve with food right at hand if he does not know it is 
there, so these unhappy people live in a mental world devoid of God.
God is also manifested in the lives of the saints, who are living proofs of his 
reality, just as Hindu, Buddhist, and Christian saints prove the existence of Krishna, 

Buddha, and Jesus.
Sinner no more
If even an evildoer worships me single-heartedly, he should be considered 
righteous, for truly he has rightly resolved (9:30).
There is an interesting and important implication here. Krishna is telling us that 
if an evil 
doer
 (for no one is evil by 
nature
) resolves to Þx his mind perpetually and 
undividedly on God, that person should be considered righteous. This is because we 
all are righteous in our inmost being, and those who resolve to conform their outer 
life to their inner nature are at that very moment righteous. Oh, yes, they will still 

have negative karmas and their minds and hearts will need to be cleared out and 
puriÞed. But if they make that genuine resolveÐnot a whim of the moment or a 
reaction of fear of future misfortuneÐthey will rise above the karmas and 

conditionings and manifest their atmic nature. We should respect and honor them, 
conÞdent, as is Krishna, that they shall succeed. They are like minors that one day 
shall enter into their inheritanceÐin a sense they are already wealthy. 
Quickly he becomes a virtuous soul and goes to everlasting peace. 
Understand: no devotee of me is ever lost. Truly, those who take refuge in me 

even though they be from wicked origins, women, Vaishyas or Shudras, they 

also attain the Supreme Goal (9:31-32).
Part of our problem is Þguring out the intended meaning of 
papayonayah
. Yoni is 
wombÐthat is easy. But papa means sin, degradation andÐto make up a wordÐ

demeritorious. In other words, people either with unfortunate karma or without 
any particularly good karma are papayonayah.
Basically Krishna is saying that even those who have bad or unfortunate karma 
236
can attain Brahman as easily as those with good spiritual karma and a marked 
degree of spiritual development from previous lives. No one is left out of KrishnaÕs 
call to higher consciousness. At the time of Krishna, and even today in India, some 
ignorant people, denying the truth of the Self, claim that only Brahmin males can 

attain liberationÐand they have to be from ÒgoodÓ backgrounds. Krishna denies this.
It does not require much imagination to further realize that even now it is not 
such a good thing in Indian society to be of a low caste or a womanÐand it was 

much, much worse before the twentieth century. Just consider how right now in 
south India when it is determined through ultrasound scanning that a child in the 
womb is female its death is cold-bloodedly planned either through abortion, poison, 

or even outright murder after her birth. Throughout the world women have lived in 
socially accepted slavery for thousands of years. The exceptions do not make the 
situation di
"
erent.
KrishnaÐand Vyasa, the transmitter of his wordsÐis telling us that since the Self 
is the same in all beings there are none that cannot attain the heights of God-

realization. All that is needed is right resolve and dedication to spiritual life.
And now the pitchÉ
All the foregoing was the windup and now Krishna gives us the pitch.
How much more easily, then, the holy Brahmins and devoted royal 
(kshatriya) sages. Having come to this impermanent and unhappy world, 

devote yourself to me. With mind Þxed on me, devoted, worshipping, bow 

down to me. Thus steadfast, with me as your supreme aim, you shall come to 
me (9:33-34).
237
Wisdom and Knowing
The Holy Lord said: Once more hear from me the supreme word which I 
speak to you, who are beloved, with the desire for your welfare (10:1).
These opening verses of the tenth chapter hold very important truths, truths 
that must be assimilated before the Divine Glory can be perceived. To undo the 
conditioning of millions of births in subhuman forms and many human births is no 
simple thing. Just to get the idea requires that we hear the basic truths of rebirth, 
karma, and spiritual evolution over and over and over again. We already know these 

things, but the knowledge is buried so deeply beneath mountains of debris 
accumulated in past lives that it might just as well not even be there at all. So we 
have to start by being told it again and again. We continually need refresher courses 

in fundamental truths. (Which is why we must continually read the Gita.) Of 
course this becomes much easier the moment we become yogis and start digging 
ourselves out of the prison.
People rarely scrutinize theirÐor othersÕÐmotives in religion, and nobody thinks 
about what GodÕs motives may be in communicating with humanity. But Krishna 

thinks this should be considered, so he tells us that God speaks to us not to express 

displeasure or pleasure, or to threaten or cajole us or to control us. GodÕs sole 
motive is our welfare. He is ever the benevolent friend who counsels us, but never 
shouts or tries to inßuence us. A prime factor in our welfare is our free will, and he 

never transgresses there.
The originless Origin
Neither the multitude of gods nor the great seers (rishis) know my origin. 
In truth I am the universal source of the gods and the great seers (10:2).
None of the highly-evolved beings who dwell in the higher astral and causal 
worlds, or the enlightened sages of earth, know the origin or beginning of God 
because he never had one. It is not just that such knowledge would be beyond the 
ken of the saints and angels, but rather that there is nothing to know. God is 

eternal. He is not just everlasting, he is without beginning. But we can know (not 
just believe) that God is 
our
 source or origin. Not in the sense that at some point of 
time we came into existence or were created by God, but in the sense that we have 
eternally existed within God, drawing our essential being from him. There never 
was a time when we did not exist, any more than there was a time when God did 
not exist. But God does not draw his being or existence from anyone, whereas we 

totally derive our being and existence from him. That is why in the second chapter 
of the Gita Krishna says to Arjuna: ÒTruly there never was a time when I was not, 
nor you, nor these lords of menÐnor in the future will there be a time when we shall 

cease to beÓ (2:12). Whether the great beings in all the worlds look before or 
behind, they see only GodÐand themselves within God. This is the vision of 
238
immortality.
He who knows me as birthless and beginningless, the mighty Lord of the 
worldÐhe among mortals is undeluded and freed from all evils (10:3).
If we can attain the direct knowing of GodÕs immortality and omnipotence, our 
sins and delusions will evaporate in that vision. For we will see God subjectively as 
one with our own Self. To see God is to become god.
The source of virtues
In the West we continually Þnd the delusion that goodness can somehow be 
produced by thoughts and deeds, that virtue can be developed in us like seeds sown 
in a garden or steel can be tempered in a ßame. But this is a great delusion. It is a 
matter of mystical experience, of union with God. For Krishna next says:
Intelligence, knowledge, non-delusion, forbearance, truthfulness, self-
restraint, equanimity, happiness, su
"
ering, birth, death, fear, and fearlessness, 

non-injury, impartiality, contentment, tapasya, almsgiving, both good repute 
and ill repute: these manifold conditions of beings arise from me alone 

(10:4-5).
This list is quite clear, but there are some nuances I think might be helpful to 
point out.
Intelligence
=buddhi. Buddhi covers a great deal more than simple Òintellect.Ó It is 
understanding, reason, and intelligence. It is the thinking mind. The word buddhi 

itself is derived from the root verb 
budh
, which means both to know something and 
be able to communicate what is known. In its highest sense, the buddhi is the 
faculty of enlightenment, which is why we have the word Buddha for an 
enlightened individual.
Knowledge
=jnana. Jnana means knowledge in the sense of wisdom, of truly 
understanding something. It can also mean good sense, but in spiritual texts it 

almost always means knowledge of Brahman, the Absolute.
Non-delusion
=asammoha. Moha is delusive attachment or infatuation based on a 
completely false perception and evaluation of the object. Occasionally it has an 

almost magical connotation, as of a person being under a spell. The idea is that the 

person su
"
ering from moha is bereft of reason and utterly overwhelmed by a 
passionate response to the object. Usually it is thought of as being directed to a 
person, but it can also be delusive obsession with a material object and even an 

aspiration or ambition for something or someone. Asammoha is complete absence 
of such obsession. So asammoha means levelheadedness and clearsightedness.
Forbearance
=kshama. Forgiveness, patience, and forbearanceÐkshama is all of 
these.
Truthfulness
=satyam. Satyam means truth, reality, truthfulness, and honesty.
Self-restraint
=dama. Dama is self-control, self-restraint, and control of the 
senses.
Calmness [equanimity]
=shama. Shama means calmness, tranquility, and control of 
the internal sense organs, including the mind. It can also mean being the same in all 
239
situations or in relation to others, being equal-minded at all times.
Happiness
=sukham. Sukham is happiness and joy, also the state of being happy 
and joyful. It is the quality of being pleasant and agreeable, as also the mental 
condition of being pleasant or agreeable.
Su
!
ering
=dukham. Dukham is pain, su
"
ering, misery, sorrow, grief, 
unhappiness, stress, or distress. Also that which is unsatisfactory or produces 

dukha.
Birth
=bhava. Bhava is Òbecoming,Ó from the verb ÒbhuÓ or ÒbhavhÓ which 
means to become or to exist. So it also means birth.
Death
=abhava. Abhava means either to never exist or to go out of existence, so 
death is an implied meaning.
Fear
=bhayam. Bhayam means fear or even terror.
Fearlessness
=abhayam. Abhayam is Òwithout fear,Ó fearlessness, or a state of 
steadfastness in which one is not swayed by fear of any kind.
Non-injury
=ahimsa. ÒHimsaÓ is injury, violence, or killing. Ahimsa, then, is non-
injury in thought, word, and deed, non-violence, non-killing, and harmlessness.
Impartiality
=samata. Samata is impartiality, equality; equanimity; and equalness. 
It is equanimity of outlook in the sense of making no distinction between friend 

and foe, pleasure and pain, etc.
Contentment
=tushtis. Tushtis means contentment or satisfaction, especially 
satisfaction, contentment, or happiness with the status quo.
Tapasya
=tapas. Tapas (tapasya) is austerityÐpractical (i.e., result-producing) 
spiritual discipline, or spiritual force. Literally it means the generation of heat or 
energy, but is always used in a symbolic manner, referring to spiritual practice and 
its e
"
ect, especially the roasting of karmic seeds, the burning up of karma.
Benevolence [almsgiving]
=danam. Danam means giving, gift, charity, almsgiving, 
self-sacriÞce, donation, or generosity.
Good repute
=yashas. Yashas is fame, celebrity, and good repute.
Ill repute
=ayashas. Ayashas is lack of fame, celebrity, or good repute, or actual 
disrepute or bad reputation.
All these things, and indeed all Òthe manifold conditions of beings [
bhavanti 
bhava bhutanam
]Ó are arising solely from the Supreme Being in response to their 
actions. The conditions are not imposed on those beings, but come as a result of 
their karmas created by their free will in the form of thoughts, words, and deeds.
The progenitors of humanity
In the past the ancient Seven Great Rishis and Four Manus, from whom 
have sprung these earthly beings, originated from me, born of my mind 
(10:6).
Krishna is telling us about the progenitors of the universe and the human race. 
First we have the Seven Rishis (Sapta Rishis), those seven great beings who exist at 

the top of creation and supervise it in all its aspects. For the production of 
humanity there were four great ones known as Manus, who produced and then 
240
guided humanity in its development both esoterically and through actual verbal 
instruction.
The Seven and the Four were Òmind-bornÓ sons of God. That is, when they 
awoke at the proper time in this creation cycle, they found themselves embodied in 

forms mentally created by Brahma. This is also true of the early humans. By the 
power of their creative thought these creators brought them into physical 
manifestation by merely willing them into embodiment.
Some believe that the Manus existed at the same time, and others consider that 
there was a succession of four extending over a huge span of time. Since there 

seems to be evidence that human beings appeared in di
"
erent parts of the world at 

about the same time, the idea of them being contemporary with one another may be 
the right one, and may even explain racial di
"
erences. However that may be, all 
human beings are children of God, being children of the original sons of God.
I have concentrated on humanity, but Krishna makes it clear that all the forms of 
sentient beings ultimately come from these eleven co-creators. So there is one great 

familyÐnot just of humans, but of all sentient beings.
The needful
He who knows in truth this my manifested glory and power, is united with 
me by unwavering yogaÐof this there is no doubt (10:7).
The only way to know the power and glory of God is to directly perceive it 
through yoga and to even experience it within ourselves. Yoga enables us to see 
God, and the seeing establishes us in yogaÐa perfect symbiosis. Krishna says this is 
beyond the possibility of any doubt.
The Brazilian healer, John of God, was asked how to meditate. He gave the 
cryptic answer: ÒGo back to before there was any creation.Ó It is unlikely that 

anyone who heard or have read these words understands them, but the Gita makes 
them clear:
I am the origin of all; from me everything proceedsÐthinking thus, the 
wise, endowed with meditation, worship me (10:8).
In other words, John of God was telling them to erase all relative existence from 
their consciousness and Ògo backÓ to God alone. God himself is the binduÐthe 
pointÐfrom which all beings began and extended into manifestation.
Here we see that when a yogi sees the truth of Brahman he does not become an 
impersonal, abstractionist intellectual, but rather becomes a worshipper of God.
With minds and lives intent on me, enlightening one another, and 
speaking of me constantly, they are content and rejoice in me. To them, the 
constantly steadfast, worshipping me with a
"
ection, I bestow the buddhi yoga 
by which they come to me (10:9-10).
This is an accurate description of a real jnani, a true knower of Brahman. Also 
notice that verse nine implies that when we completely orient our lives toward God 

we will attract to ourselves other devotees with whom we will speak of divine 
things, each encouraging and assisting one another in the path to God-realization.
241
The lamp
Out of compassion for them, I, abiding in their own Selves, destroy the 
darkness born of ignorance by the shining lamp of knowledge (10:11).
The Absolute in all its glory dwells as much in the heart of the ignorant as in the 
heart of the wiseÐit needs only to be perceived. In his mercy God shines, himself 
lighting the mind and heart, dispelling the darkness of ignorance.
242
Going To The Source
Krishna has already given a great deal of information regarding the nature of 
Brahman. Now we are going to be shown how much an embodied human being can 
comprehend of God, and how he should respond to that knowledge.
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Abode, the 
Supreme PuriÞer, the Divine Eternal Spirit, the First God, the Birthless and 

All-pervading. Thus do all the sages declare you: the Divine Sage Narada, 
Asita, Devala, and Vyasa. And you yourself say it to me (10:12-13).
Nearly all religion tries to reduce God to an all-powerful human being, rather 
than elevate human beings to the status of divinity. (I include much of Hinduism in 

this, as well.) Whatever we may be thinking intellectually, we tend to respond to 

the thought of God according to how much we have been conditioned by ignorant 
religion. But beyond all whittled-down and adjusted religion there is the Eternal 
Dharma which proclaims the truth about God, human beings, and their common 

essence. This dharma is most perfectly presented to us in the Gita. It is what Vyasa 
tells us we can know about God.
Supreme Brahman
. Often the Upanishads speak of there being a higher and a 
lower Brahman, referring to the unmanifest and manifest aspects of Brahman. The 

word 
param
Ðsupreme, or higherÐis used here to declare that we can know right here 
and now the Absolute Reality in its pure Essence, not in any lesser sense. 
Supreme Abode
. Brahman is That in which all things existÐhave their beingÐso it 
is the ultimate abode of the Self. Right now we experience living far below this, 
though in reality we are always dwelling in Brahman. The Gita is telling us that 

even the embodied person can have the experience of dwelling in Absolute 
Consciousness.
Supreme PuriÞer
. ÒEvery man that hath this hope in him puriÞeth himself, even as 
he is pureÓ (I John 3:3). By baptizingÐimmersingÐourselves in God through yoga 

sadhana we become supremely puriÞed. For 
pavitram paramam
 also can mean 
Supremely Pure.
Divine Eternal Spirit
. Obviously Brahman is eternal, divine, and spirit, but these 
words have been put here as an indication that in the vision of God we will see that 
we, too, are eternal, and therefore always divine in nature. And that nature is pure 

spirit.
The First God
. Not existing in time or space, there can be nothing prior to 
Brahman, or to us. 
Adidevam
Ðliterally the prime or Þrst godÐimplies that there is a 
chain, a hierarchy of spiritual powers, of greatly evolved beings, devoted to the 
maintenance and evolution of the cosmos and those within it. These holy ones can 
rightly be called gods, but only Brahman is the primal God, the God of gods.
(Those who look upon the monotheism of the Bible in a simplistic and inßexible 
manner should consider these inspired statements of the prophet David: ÒGod 
243
standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the godsÓ (Psalms 
82:1). ÒFor the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all godsÓ (Psalms 95:3). 
ÒO give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for everÓ (Psalms 
136:2).
Birthless and All-pervading
. God never came into being, but has existed forever. 
Nor is God to be found in one place and not another, for he pervades all in eternal 

omnipresence.
All the sages
. All the rishis, the seers, have known GodÐnot just known about 
GodÐand they have said all the foregoing to be true. Arjuna says this because the 

worthy seeker-aspirant takes into serious account the words of those who have gone 

before him in the search for God. He will not be a slave of dogmatism or a blind 
believer, but he will provisionally accept the likelihood of the statements of 
Brahman-knowers until he comes to know for himself their truth and value.
You yourself
. Not only have the sages told us the truth of Brahman, Brahman 
itself from deep within our consciousness has caused the intuition of these spiritual 

facts to arise into our minds and hearts. In this way, as Patanjali assures us, 

Brahman Òis guru even of the ancientsÓ (Yoga Sutras 1:26), and us, as well.
In a Þnal declaration of faith Arjuna says: 

All this which you say to me I believe is true. Truly, Lord God (Bhagavan), 
neither the gods nor the demons know your manifestation (10:14).
Even highly evolved intelligences, whether positive or negative, can never know 
the full truth of God. Only those who have risen far higher and beheld God in a 

profound knowing that surpasses all other knowledge can truly 
know
.
For you alone know yourself by yourself, O you, the Purushottama: 
bestowing welfare on all beings, Lord of Beings, God of gods, Lord of the 

universe (10:15).
All these things, also, can be known by the persistent yogi, but the most 
signiÞcant thing is: ÒYou alone know yourself by yourself.Ó It is important because 

it is the truth about us, as well. Unless we open our inner consciousness we will 
know nothingÐeither about ourselves or about God.
Appealing to God
Please describe completely your divine self-manifestations by which 
manifestations you pervade the worlds and abide in them. How may I know 
you, O Yogi, constantly meditating on you? And in what aspects of your Being 
are you to be thought of by me, O Bhagavan? Explain to me further in detail 
your powers and manifestations. I am never satiated with hearing your 

amrita-like words (10:16-18).
God is not just behind all things, he is dwelling in all things as their ultimate 
Self. Since we are not beholding God directly in his essential Being, Arjuna asks to 

know what things in relative existence reveal the many aspects of GodÕs Being.
The revelation
244
The Holy Lord said: Listen! I shall recount to you my truly divine self-
manifestationsÐonly the most prominent because there is no end to my extent 
(10:19).
Then, in twenty-three verses he give a long list of those things in which the 
divine power is most clearly manifest. Many of them deal with things that are 

themselves symbols of divine powers rather than objective realities. (The Glossary 
deÞnes the many names and terms, so I will not do so here.)
Krishna starts right at the top with the words: 
I am the Self abiding in the heart of all beings; I am the beginning, the 
middle, and the end of all beings as well (10:20).
If he had stopped there he would have covered everything in those few words, 
words that by now I hope need no commentary or expansion.
For much of what follows you may need to consult the Glossary.
Of the Adityas I am Vishnu; of luminaries the radiant Sun; of the Maruts I 
am Marichi; among the stars I am the Moon (10:21).
The sun is the source of the energies that make evolutionÐphysical, mental, and 
spiritualÐpossible. When liberated beings leave their bodies they rise into and 
through the sun, passing into realms of existence beyond any need for further birth 
in the material plane. The Chandogya Upanishad says: ÒEven as a great extending 

highway runs between two villages, this one and that yonder, even so the rays of the 
sun go to both these worlds, this one and that yonder. They start from the yonder 
sun and enter into the nadis. They start from the nadis and enter into the yonder 

sun.Ó (Chandogya Upanishad 8.6.2).
Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the gods I am Indra; of the senses I 
am the mind; in all beings, I am consciousness (10:22).
The path to God, then, lies in the mind and in the awareness (consciousness) 
that lies behind the mind. Through meditation we experience that consciousness 

more and more until it encompasses Divinity itself.
Of the Rudras, I am Shankara (Shiva); of the yakshas and rakshasas, I am 
Kubera; of the Vasus, I am Pavaka (Agni); and of mountains I am Meru. Of 

priests, know me to be the chief, Brihaspati; of commanders of armies I am 

Skanda; of bodies of water I am the ocean. Of the great Rishis I am Bhrigu; of 
words, I am Om [EkaksharaÐthe one-syllable]; of sacriÞces, I am japa; of 
immovables, I am the Himalayas (10:23-25).
In this verse, Òyakshas and rakshasasÓ refers to the benevolent, semidivine 
beings.
Of trees I am the ashwattha; of divine seers 
[deva-rishis]
, I am Narada; of 
the gandharvas I am Chitraratha; among the siddhas I am the sage Kapila 
(10:26).
Kapila was the formulator of the Sankhya philosophy on which the Yoga 
philosophy is based. The Gita itself is an exposition of Sankhya philosophy. Sankhya 

is mentioned speciÞcally Þve times in the Gita, and the second chapter of the Gita is 
entitled ÒSankhya Yoga.Ó
245
Of horses, know me to be Uchchaishravas who was produced from the 
amrita; of princely elephants, I am Airavata; and among men I am the king. Of 
weapons, I am the Thunderbolt of Indra; of cows I am Kamadhenu; of 
procreators, I am Kamadeva; of serpents I am Vasuki. Of Nagas, I am Ananta; 

of water beings, Varuna; of ancestors [pitris], I am Aryaman; of subduers I am 
Yama. Of Daityas, I am Prahlada; among measurers I am Time; of animals I 
am the lion; of birds I am Garuda. Of puriÞers I am the wind; of warriors I am 

Rama; of sea creatures I am the dolphin; of rivers, I am the Ganges. Of 
creations I am the beginning, the middle and the end; of knowledge, the 
knowledge of the Self; of debaters I am logic (10:27-32).
Krishna says he is the knowledge of the Self, for to know the Supreme SelfÐ
BrahmanÐis to attain permanent union with It.
Of letters I am the letter A; of compounds I am the dual; I am inÞnite 
Time; I am the Sustainer, the Omniscient. I am all-devouring death and the 
origin of those events that are to be. Among feminine qualities I am fame, 
prosperity, speech, memory, mental vigor, courage and endurance. Of chants I 

am the Brihatsaman; of meters I am Gayatri; of months I am Margashirsha; of 
seasons I am Spring. I am the gambling skill of the fraudulent, the splendor of 
the splendorous; I am victory and e
"
ort; I am the sattwa of the sattwic. Of the 

Vrishnis I am Krishna; of the Pandavas I am Arjuna; of the sages I am Vyasa; 
of the poets I am Ushanas. I am the power of rulers, I am the strategy of the 
ambitious, of secrets, I am silence; the knowledge of knowers am I. Also I am 

that which is the seed of all beings. There is nothing that could exist without 
existing through meÐneither animate nor inanimate. (10:33-39)
The Consciousness of God encompasses all.
The conclusion
There is no end to my divine manifestations. But this has been declared by 
me to exemplify the extent of my manifestations. Whatever is glorious or 

prosperous or powerful, in every instance understand that it springs from but 
a fraction of my radiant Power. But what is this extensive knowledge to you? I 

ever support this whole world by just one portion of myself (10:40-42).
Jaya Bhagavan!
246
From Hearing To Seeing
Spiritual teaching, if it is authentic, always has a markedly practical e
"
ect. So 
here at the beginning of the eleventh chapter of the Gita Arjuna tells Krishna:
Arjuna said: As a kindness to me you spoke the Supreme Secret that is 
known as the Supreme Self. By this my confusion is gone (11:1).
Amazing words! But nonetheless absolutely true.
First, knowledge about the Self and the Supreme Self come to the evolving spirit 
directly from God in a deeply personal manner, from Friend to friend. We must 
never lose sight of this. However high we may soar in ideas about the transcendent 
aspect of God, we must never lose sight of the fact that God is a Person relating to 
persons. Both God and we are fundamentally personsÐpurushasÐand spiritual life 

must always be conducted in this perspective.
Second, the knowledge of God is the ultimate knowing. Beyond it there is 
nothing, for it embraces all things, God being inÞnite.
Thirdly, those who possess this knowing are freed absolutely from all delusionÐ
it melts away like mist before the rays of the sun and is found no more.
Seeing comes from believing
It is exactly in the right order of things that after the seeker hears the truth and 
recognizes it by the intuition awakened by meditation, he would want to progress 
further by actually seeing/experiencing that which he now knows through intuition. 
For direct experience is the Þnal step in our evolution. Therefore Arjuna now says:
The origin and dissolution of beings has been heard by me in detail from 
you, and your eternal greatness. Thus, as you have described yourself, O 

Supreme Lord, I wish to behold your Ishwara Form, O Purushottama. If you 
think it is possible for me to see it, O Lord of Yogis, then show to me your 

eternal Self 
[Being]
 (11:2-4).
There is one point that is worthy of note in the fourth verse: ÒIf you think it is 
possible for me to see itÉ.Ó It has nothing to do with GodÕs attitude toward us or a 

judgment as to our worthiness. It is simply a matter of capability. As Yogananda 
said in one of his talks, if you expand your consciousness su
!
ciently, Òthen God 
will automatically get into you.Ó The English may be a bit novel, but the idea is 

clear. This is what yoga is all about: preparing us for the Divine Vision.
In response Krishna says:

Behold my forms a hundredfoldÐrather, a thousandfoldÐvarious, divine, 
and of many colors and shapes. Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the 
two Ashwins, and the Maruts. Behold many wonders never seen before. See 
now present here in this my body the whole universeÐboth the animate and 

the inanimateÐand whatever else you desire to see. But you are not able to see 
me with your own eyes. I give to you the divine eye: behold my Ishwara 
247
Power.
Sanjaya said: Then, having thus spoken, O King, Krishna, the Great Lord 
of Yoga, showed unto Arjuna his supreme Ishwara Form: (11:5-9).
As in the previous chapter, there is a tremendous amount of lists of things seen 
by Arjuna, many of them relating to Hindu cosmology. As before, I will only 
comment on those points that have a practical meaning for the yogi.
With many mouths and eyes, with many wondrous aspects, with many 
divine ornaments, with many divine weapons upraised, wearing divine 

garlands and clothing, with divine perfumes and ointments; embodying all 
wonders, the InÞnite, Omniscient [Facing In All Directions]. If a thousand 

suns should rise together in the sky, such splendor would be like the 
brilliance of that Great Being. There, together in the body of the God of gods, 
Arjuna saw the entire universe present, though of many divisions.
Then Arjuna, Þlled with astonishment and with his hair standing on end, 
bowing his head to the Divine Being, with joined palms said: O God, I behold 

all the gods and all kinds of beings together in your body: Lord Brahma seated 

upon the lotus, and all the rishis and celestial serpents. I see you in every 
direction in inÞnite form, with many arms, stomachs, faces and eyes. Neither 
end, nor middle, nor beginning of you do I see, O Lord of All, whose form is 

the universe. I see you crowned, armed with a mace and a discus; a mass of 
radiance shining everywhere, very hard to look at, all around blazing like 
burning Þre and the sunÐbeyond measure. You are the Unchanging, the 

supreme object of knowledge, you are the ultimate resting-place of all; you 
are the imperishable defender of Eternal Dharma, you are the Primal Purusha, 
I now realize (11:10-18).
The new idea introduced here is that Brahman is itself the defender/protector/
preserver of eternal dharma. This is because dharma is the very nature of Brahman. 

Sanatana Dharma is not a matter of the will or whim of a deity, but Reality in 

demonstration. This is how yoga can be the science of the Divine. Praying, praising, 
serving, believing, and all suchÐnone of this has any ultimate reality. This should be 
no surprise, for all along we have known that Brahman alone is real.
ÒArmed with a mace and a discusÓ indicates the form of Vishnu, and Krishna as 
the incarnation of that aspect of God known as Vishnu.
You are without beginning, middle, or end, of inÞnite power, with 
innumerable arms; the sun and moon your eyes; blazing, consuming Þre your 
mouth; consuming the universe with your brilliance. This space between 
heaven and earth, and all the directions are Þlled by you alone. Seeing this, 

your marvelous and awesome form, the three worlds are trembling, O Exalted 
One. There, truly, into you enter the throngs of gods, some of which extol you 
in fear with joined palms, crying ÒHail!Ó The assemblages of great Rishis and 

Siddhas extol you with abundant praises. The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, 
Sadhyas, and Vishwa-Devas, the two Ashwins, Maruts, Ushmapas, throngs of 
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Siddhas: all behold you, overcome. Having 
248
seen your great form with many mouths, eyes, many arms, many thighs and 
many feet, many stomachs, having many terrible tusks, the worlds are 
quaking, and so also am I. Truly, having seen you touching the sky, blazing, 
many-colored, with gaping mouths, with large and Þery eyes: I am trembling 

in my inmost heart, and Þnd neither courage nor calm. Having seen your 
dreadful mouths, gaping with tusks, blazing like Pralaya-Þres, I have no sense 
of direction or place of refuge. Have mercy, O Lord of Gods, Abode of the 

universe. And there all the sons of Dhritarashtra along with the throngs of 
kings, Bhishma, Drona, and Karna, with our chief warriors, enter precipitately 
into your mouths, terrible, gaping with tusks and fearful to behold. Some are 

found sticking in the gaps between your teeth, and some with their heads 
completely pulverized. As the torrents of many rivers ßow towards the ocean, 
so these heroes of the world of men now enter into your ßaming mouths. As 

moths precipitately rush into a blazing Þre to destruction, in like manner so 
do these worlds also rush into your mouths to their destruction. You lick up 
and swallow all the worlds on every side with your ßaming mouths. Filling 

the whole world with radiance, your Þerce rays are consuming it, O Vishnu. 
(11:19-30)
I have been amazed through the years that this picture is not cited by the 
Christian missionaries as proof that the God of the Hindus is Òthe Devil.Ó I am 

equally amazed by the fact that I, with only a fundamentalist Protestant 
background, read this account and was thrilled by it, realizing that it was the 

nearest to an accurate description of the Divine in Its aspect as all-devouring Time 
as possible, a description of the indescribable. It all seemed normal to me, and still 
does.
Brahmacharini Mildred, one of YoganandaÕs disciples, told me: ÒMaster said 
there is an aspect of God that would drive you insane if you saw it.Ó I suspect he 

was referring to this aspect which Vyasa has so amazingly presented. I am glad to 

say that VyasaÕs version Òdrove me saneÓ and made me a Sanatana Dharmi.
Aspiring to know
We have all heard that a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing, but lack of 
knowledge can be more dangerous, especially in spiritual life. So Arjuna tells 
Krishna:
Tell me who you are: you of terrible form. Salutations to you, O Best of 
Gods, be merciful. I desire to comprehend you, O Primal One. I wish to 

understand your intent (11:31).
As much as we can, we need to intellectually grasp What/Who God is, and what 
is his ÒintentionÓ or purpose for us. Otherwise we can never know what/who we 

are, and what we are supposed to be doing here, or anywhere, for that matter. True 

religion is not satisÞed with groveling and slavish obeying: it seeks to turn 
unknowers into knowers, into worthy seers and siddhas.
The Holy Lord said: I am mighty world-destroying Time, here made 
249
manifest to annihilate the worlds. Even without you, none of the warriors 
here arrayed within the hostile armies shall live. Therefore do you arise and 
acquire glory. Having conquered the enemies, enjoy thriving domain. These 
have already been struck down by me. Be merely an instrument. Drona, 

Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, and other battle heroes, already killed by me, do 
you kill. Do not hesitate. Fight. You shall conquer the adversaries in battle 
(32-34).
Worshiping God
Sanjaya said: Having heard this speech of Krishna, Arjuna with joined 
palms and trembling, bowing down, addressed Krishna in a faltering voice, 
overwhelmed with fear.
Arjuna said: Rightly the world is delighted and rejoices in your renown. 
The demons, terriÞed, ßee in all directions, and the throngs of siddhas bow to 

you in adoration (11:35-36).
Authentic reverence of God is not just sentimentality or begging. Rather, it 
strengthens and moves forward the machinery of the universe, purifying, elevating, 

and stimulating it. And it does the same to those who are the Godwards. But 
demons in human form revolt and ßee when confronted with the Divine or what 

truly relates to or reveals the Divine. I have witnessed this many times. They also 
protest when anything of a spiritual nature is brought even peripherally into their 
environment. They howl in many ways: some quite sophisticated and intellectual, 

and some in overt hatred and spite. But the wellsprings are the same: inner evil. On 
the other hand, the Godwards joyfully reverence God, bowing down before him, 
thankful to be able to do so. This is a special trait of Eastern religion: Hindu, Taoist, 

Buddhist, and Eastern Christian. What joy they receive!
A new point
Now we move ahead:
And why should they not bow to you, O Great One, Primal Creator greater 
than Brahma, InÞnite Lord of Gods, Abode of the Universe, you the eternal, 
the truly existing, the non-existent, and That which is beyond both (11:37).
Here, too, there is one point that is relatively new to our study: ÒYouÉ the truly 
existing, the non-existent, and That which is beyond both.Ó It is not hard to Þgure 

that God encompasses all that exists, but how can Brahman also be what is not? 
ÒWhat is notÓ has three aspects: 1) what is not because it exists only in a potential 
formÐas does the entire Þeld of relative existence when it is withdrawn after a 

creation cycle; 2) that which has never so far existed, but which Brahman in its 
limitless creative power could bring into existence; and Þnally 3) everything that 
Òis,Ó simply because nothing relative ever really exists at any time, but is only an 

idea in the individual and the divine minds. Since ÒisÓ and Òis notÓ is a dwandwa, a 
pair of dualities, it is obvious that for Brahman, being beyond duality, such 
distinctions cannot exist. That which transcends ÒisÓ and Òis notÓ is Brahman itself. 
250
In this context, ÒisÓ is no more real than Òis not.Ó
Known/Knower
You are the Primal God, the Ancient Purusha; you the supreme resting-
place of all this universe. You are the knower, that which is to be known and 
the supreme dwelling state of consciousness and being. By you is the whole 
universe pervaded, O you of inÞnite forms (11:38).
That which is known is also the knower. Such a concept seems beyond our 
comprehension until we realize that everything ÒknownÓ is just an idea in our 

mind, and that is us. A perception is only a modiÞcation of the mind-substance 

(chitta) itself, and has no objective reality. So the object is really the subject all the 
time.
You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Chandra, Prajapati, and the Great-
grandfather, Brahma. I bow, yea, I bow to you a thousand times, again and 

again I bow, I bow to you. Salutation to you before and behind; salutation on 
every side, O All! You are inÞnite valor and boundless might. You pervade allÐ

therefore you are All (11:39-40).
Those who see and know in the divine realms worship, bowing again and again 
with both body and mind. Krishna is showing us that jnana leads to bhakti, and 

bhakti leads to jnana. For they have the same object and purpose.
A reaction
History is Þlled with examples of people who have been kind or unkind to 
someone only to discover that the ÒsomeoneÓ was a person of great prominence 
unrecognized by them. Arjuna Þnds himself in this situation. In India, to touch 

someone even unintentionally with the foot is considered great carelessness and 
rudeness. When that happens, the o
"
ender touches the feet of the person and begs 
their pardon. To touch them with the foot deliberately, and kick them (even gently) 

is a cardinal insult. Yet, very dear and close friends sometimes do such things in jest 
as sign of intimacy and camaraderie. We are told that often when resting together, if 
Krishna was lying near, Arjuna would push at him with his foot and tell him to 

move over. We are also told that if Krishna remarked that it was going to rain, and 
then it did not, Arjuna would say: ÒWhat a prophet you are! How wise! How all-
knowing!Ó and mock him. He would also address him familiarly, leaving aside 

KrishnaÕs royal and spiritual status. (Everyone knew Krishna was Yogeshwara, the 
Lord of Yoga).
Having now witnessed the real nature of Krishna as InÞnite Being, Arjuna 
pleads:
Whatever I have said impetuously as in ordinary friendship: ÒO Krishna, O 
Yadava, O Comrade,Ó unconscious of your greatness, through ignorance 
though with a
"
ection, and, as if joking, disrespectfully treated you, in play, 
lying down, sitting or while eating, alone or with others, O Imperishable One, 
for that I ask pardon of you, O Boundless One. You are the Father of the 
251
world, of the animate and inanimate, you who are to be revered, you are the 
worshipful Guru. There is no one your equal in the three worlds. Who can 
excel you, O you of Incomparable Glory? Therefore, bowing down in 
prostration, I ask forgiveness of you, O Lord, who are worthy of honor. As a 

father to a son, a friend to a friend, a dear one to a beloved: O God, be 
merciful (11:41-44).
In 
The Night of the Iguana
, one of the characters refers to ÒmanÕs inhumanity to 
God.Ó When we really grasp that all along we have been dealing with Absolute 

Divinity itselfÐignoring, lying to, trying to fool, denying, and avoiding itÐwe are 
overcome with regret and dismay. How could we have done that? Like Arjuna we 

may try to Þnd consolation in the idea that God is friend, father, and beloved, but in 
the long run that will not avail. Real peace will only come to us when we realize 
that God is our ultimate Self, that we are absolutely one with himÐso how can he be 

either pleased or displeased with us? In fact, all those unworthy things we were 
doing to God we were really doing to our own selves as well.
But there is more. In the religious lore of the ages we Þnd instances in which a 
face-to-face encounter with Reality virtually incapacitates the beholder, that it 

overstrains the still-evolving mind, as it is beyond its ability to take in and yet keep 
on functioning normally. God knows what he is doing. The eucharist of the Liberal 

Catholic Church speaks of Òthe limitations of time and space, wherewith it is Thy 
will to veil our earthly eyes from the excess of Thy glory,Ó because at its present 
level of development the human mind cannot cope with its fullness. Arjuna 

experiences this, too, and therefore says:
I am delighted at having seen that which has never before been seen, and 
yet my mind trembles with fear. Show me in mercy, O Lord, your previous 

form, O Lord of gods, abode of the universe. I want to see you as before: 
wearing a crown, armed with a mace, holding a discus. Appear in that four-
armed form, O you of a thousand arms, who are embodied in all the forms in 

the universe (11:45-46).
Sometimes we have to settle for the veil rather than what is being veiledÐat least 
for a while longer. In the same way, Arjuna asks to see the soothing form of Vishnu, 

the Preserver, in order to settle and reassure his mind.
How it comes about
What brings about the cosmic vision?
The Holy Lord said: By my grace toward you this supreme Form has been 
shown to you by my own power: this form of mine made of radiant splendor, 
universal, unbounded and primal, which has not been seen before by aught 
but you. Not by Vedic sacriÞce or study, not by gifts, not by rites, nor by 
severe austerities can I be seen in such a form in the world of men, by any 

other than you. Be not afraid or bewildered, having seen this awesome form 
of mine. With your fears dispelled and with your heart gladdened, see once 
again this former form of mine.
252
Sanjaya said: Having thus spoken to Arjuna, Krishna showed once again 
his usual form. Thus the Great-souled One, having resumed his gentle, 
wondrous form, paciÞed the frightened one.
Arjuna said: Seeing your gentle human form, now I am composed and my 
mind is restored to normal (11:47-51).
The Þnal assurance
Krishna sums up all the implications of ArjunaÕs experience in words that apply 
to us who seek the divine union:
The Holy Lord said: Di
!
cult to see is this form of mine which you have 
seen. Even the gods ever long to behold this form. Not by Vedic study, not by 
tapasya, not by charitable gifts, and not by sacriÞce can I be seen as you have 
seen me. By single-minded devotion alone can I be known and truly seen in 

this manner and entered into. He who engages in action, holding me as the 
highest aim, devoted, abandoning attachment, free from enmity to all beings, 
comes to me (11:52-55).
May we pursue this without delay.
253
The Wisdom of Devotion
Since the tenth and eleventh chapters of the Gita dealt with divine 
manifestations, and the eleventh described an actual vision of divinity as the 
cosmos, the next subject is how the yogi should think ofÐconceive ofÐGod as he 
attempts to Þx his mind upon him.
Saguna or Nirguna?
Through the ages a philosophical tug-of-war has gone on between those who 
prefer to consider God as possessing limitless, divine qualities, and those who 
prefer to think of God as being unthinkable, utterly beyond anything that can be 
conceptualized or spoken. These two aspects are called Saguna (with qualities) and 

Nirguna (without qualities). The yogi knows that both are true, but many 
philosophers insist on holding to one and rejecting the other, or declaring one to be 
higher or more accurate than the other. Consequently Vyasa has this twelfth chapter 

open with these words:
Arjuna said: The constantly steadfast who worship you with devotion, and 
those who worship the eternal UnmanifestÐwhich of them has the better 

understanding of yoga? (12:1).
Arjuna addresses Krishna as the Saguna Brahman, since he is communicating 
with Arjuna as a conditioned being.
The Holy Lord said: Those who are ever steadfast, who worship me, Þxing 
their minds on me, endowed with supreme faith, I consider them to be the 

best versed in yoga (12:2).
This is extremely clear, at least as far as the traits of those who have a better 
grasp of yoga is concerned. But why is their grasp better? Because they are able to 

focus their intention on a concept of the Divine that is not only within the scope of 

their intellect, it is a concept that inspires their seeking, for it is based on love 
which, as Swami Sriyukteswar points out in 
The Holy Science
, is in its essential 
nature a magnetic force that unites the seeker with the object of the seeking. The 
path of devotion (bhakti) is as pragmatic as the path of knowledge (jnana).
The path of the formless
But those who worship the Imperishable, the UndeÞnable, the 
Unmanifested, the All-pervading, Inconceivable, Unchanging, Unmoving, the 
ConstantÐ (12:3).
None of these qualities are within the range of our experience, not even from 
eternity. So how can we begin to conceive of them? For example, in the West it is 

thought that ÒeternalÓ means that which is without end, but in reality it means that 

which has neither beginning nor endÐthat which is absolutely outside the realm of 
time, space, or relativity. Can we think the unthinkable? Can we conceive the 
254
inconceivable? Of course notÐits very nature makes it impossible for us. So how, 
then, can Nirguna Brahman be approached, much less known? Krishna tells us.
Controlling all the senses, even-minded everywhere, happy in the welfare 
of all beingsÐthey attain to me also (12:4).
The Þnal clause is heartening, but consider what is required of those that really 
seek the formless and qualitiless Absolute.
Controlling all the senses
. 
Samniyamyendriyagramam
 means both subduing and 
controllingÐthat is, discipliningÐthe senses and powers of the body and mind 

(indriyas). Asceticism is the key trait of those that seek God, either saguna or 

nirguna. But they do not consider themselves as being in any way self-denying. Just 
the opposite: they see their way of life as real freedom from the bondages so avidly 
sought and cherished by the world. They do not grin and bear it; they rejoice with 

thankful hearts that they have found the key to a wider and freer life.
In 
The Scent of Water
, Elizabeth Goodge wrote about a medieval thief who 
reformed and became a hermit. He helped build a church and did all the 

woodcarving. At the back of the church in an obscure place he carved his self-
portrait showing himself wearing a crown of thorns. But the observant saw that 
there was a gap between the thorns and the surface of the carving, and when they 

put their Þngers inside, by touch they could tell that beneath the crown of thorns he 
was really wearing a crown of roses. That was his secret. The world saw him as 
penitent and self-denying, but in reality he was crowned with joy.
Even-minded everywhere
. 
Sarvatra samabuddhaya
 means everywhere and at all times 
to be even-minded, undisturbed by anythingÐneither repelled nor attracted, but ever 

centered in the unmoving, witnessing consciousness that is the Self.
Happy in the welfare of all beings
. 
Sarvabhutahite ratah
 means to be rejoicing in the 
welfare of all beingsÐnot just human beings, but every living thing. It is very 

important that Krishna lists this trait, as jnanis are usually thought to be antiseptic, 

uncaring, and outright incompassionate people who are indi
"
erent to the world and 
all that goes on in it. Rather, as Krishna has already said in the sixth chapter 
regarding the jnani: ÒHe who is steadfast in yoga [yoga-yukta] at all times sees the 

Self present in all beings and all beings present in the Self. He who sees me 
everywhere, and sees all things in meÐI am not lost to him, and he is not lost to me. 
He, established in unity, worships me dwelling in all things; whatever be his mode 

of life, that yogi ever abides in me. He who judges pleasure or pain by the same 
standard everywhere that he applies unto himself, that yogi is deemed the 
highestÓ (6:29-32).
What a marvelous, positive picture. I can tell you this is no abstract ideal, but a 
very accurate picture of a Brahman-knower, for I have seen it myself in the great 

yogis I met in India, especially Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh. Every saint I met in 

India was lovingly intent on the welfare of othersÐand I do not mean they were 
obsessed with promoting an organization or traveling around gathering admirers 
(and contributors). In fact, nearly every holy person I encountered usually stayed in 
255
one place and devoted their life to the upliftment of those who came seeking refuge 
from the Þre of this haywire, material world. They lived in tranquility as Krishna 
says, and true hearts were drawn to them as the bee to the fragrant ßower. They 
were always available, for their life, like that of God, was one of loving service to all.
This is indeed a beautiful image, yet Krishna goes on to say: 
Greater is the e
"
ort of those whose minds are set on the Unmanifest, for 
the Unmanifest as a goal is truly di
!
cult for the embodied ones to reach 
(12:5).
Actually, I have already explained the ÒwhyÓ of this.
The way of Form (Saguna Brahman)
Now Krishna expounds the way of those who devote themselves to the 
attainment of Saguna Brahman.
But those who, renouncing all actions in me, intent on me as the highest 
goal worship me, meditating on me with single-minded YogaÐof those whose 

consciousness has entered into me, I am soon the deliverer from the ocean of 

mortal samsara (12:6-7).
This, too, merits close scrutiny.

Renouncing all actions in me
. There are many people wandering around India 
pretending to be monks and excusing their indolence and worthlessness as 
Òrenunciation of action.Ó But Krishna indicates that renunciation must only take 
place in the state of God-consciousnessÐthat mere abstention from action to 

supposedly free or purify the mind is meaningless and worthless, a delusion based 
on ignorance and laziness. It is utterly mistaken to think that withdrawal from 
action will free our minds to seek God. That is getting the order completely turned 

around. First we must establish ourselves in at least a practical degree of spiritual 
awareness before we can think of stopping action.
Sri Ramakrishna said: ÒThere is a kind of renunciation called Ômonkey 
renunciation.Õ A man tormented by the troubles of the world goes to Benares 

wearing an ocher robe. No news of him for days. Then comes a letter, ÔYou should 
not worry. I have got a job.ÕÓ In the same way when people do not get a job for a 

long time or feel intimidated by the thought of steady work, want out of a di
!
cult 
Þnancial situation, are discontented with their family life or faced with another year 
of a college education, they begin making noises about taking up monastic life and 

write to us inquiring as to whether we have Òroom for a hermitÓ in our ashram. In 
other words, they want to come and sit around in one place with no obligations 
until they get bored and get the revelation that they can serve God better in the 

worldÐas if they would have ever left it!
Intent on me as the highest [goal]
. This has two aspects: 1) regarding God as the 
Supreme to such a degree that nothing else occupies our mind or is valued by us, 

and 2) regarding Saguna Brahman as the AbsoluteÐnot a lesser or lower aspect of 
God. For there is only Brahman; the distinction of saguna and nirguna is from our 
side alone.
256
Worship me, meditating on me with single-minded Yoga
. Unwavering meditation on 
God is the worship of God. This really should be kept in mind whenever in the Gita 
we are told to worship God. When Krishna was speaking to Arjuna there was no 
such thing as a Hindu temple in the entire world. Followers of Vedic religion only 

adopted image worship and temple ritual after having been inßuenced by the 
Greeks who settled in Kashmir. It is the same with Buddhism. For centuries  in 
India there were no images or temples of Buddha, only dharma halls with a dharma 

chakra (wheel of dharma) on the front wall.
Whose consciousness has entered into me
. The consciousness must not just be 
directed to God or concentrated on GodÐit must 
enter
 into God. The yogiÕs 
consciousness must be merged into the Consciousness that is God.
I am soon the deliverer from the ocean of mortal samsara
. It will not take dozens of 
lives. Those who are real yogis will soon arrive at the goal. For them the heaving sea 

of constant birth and death is no more.
Keep your mind on me alone, causing your intellect to enter into me. 
Thenceforward, without doubt, you shall dwell in me (12:8).
That is certainly clear. It is a simple matter of cause and e
"
ect. Those who keep 
their minds absorbed in God already begin living in God and shall become perfectly 

united with God both in this world and in the next.
The alternative
If you are unable to Þx your mind on me steadily, then seek to attain me by 
the constant practice of yoga. Even by performing actions for my sake, you 
shall attain perfection. If you are unable to do even this, then relying upon my 
yoga power, relinquishing all the fruits of action, act with self-restraint. 

Knowledge is indeed better than practice; meditation is superior to 
knowledge; renunciation of the fruit of action is better than meditation; peace 
immediately follows renunciation (12:9-12).
This does not mean that yoga is not necessary, but rather that sometimes we 
have to work backwards. Tyaga, the word translated ÒrenunciationÓ literally means 

Òabandonment,Ó and in the Gita means the relinquishment of the fruit of action. 

Anxiety about results can torment even the yogi, so at the very beginning we must 
put aside any motives but devotion to God. Actually, God must be the only aim of 
our life, not just our formal yoga practice. As the prophet Isaiah said: ÒThou wilt 

keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on theeÓ (Isaiah 26:3).
257
Right Conduct
He who hates no being, is friendly and compassionate, free from Òmine,Ó 
free from ÒI,Ó the same in pain and pleasure, patient, the yogi who is always 
content, self-controlled and of Þrm resolve, whose mind and intellect are Þxed 
on me, who is devoted to meÐhe is dear to me. He who agitates not the world, 

and whom the world agitates not, who is freed from joy, envy, fear and 
distressÐhe is dear to me. He who is indi
"
erent, pure, capable, objective, free 
from anxiety, abandoning all undertakings, devoted to meÐhe is dear to me. 

He rejoices not, he hates not, he grieves not, he desires not, renouncing the 
agreeable and disagreeable, full of devotionÐhe is dear to me. The same to 
enemy and to friend, the same in honor and disgrace, in heat and cold, 

pleasure and pain, freed from attachment, the same in blame and praise, 
silent, content with anything whatever, not identifying with any place or 
abode, steady-minded, full of devotionÐthis man is dear to me (12:13-19).
Learning to behave
Somewhere a very long time ago (over half a century) I read in an article by 
Paramhansa Yogananda that his guru, Sri Yukteswar, said to him at the beginning of 
their association: ÒLearn to behave.Ó Yogananda commented that this was the most 
important teaching he ever received from Sri Yukteswar. I admit that it puzzled me 

because I was so conditioned by the ÒYou behave yourself!Ó rebukes from parents to 
unruly children. Nevertheless, something seeped into my consciousness, because 
when two years later I went to India I immediately realized that the major thing I 

needed to do there was learn to behave. Part of the Aryan Eightfold Path taught by 
Buddha was Right Conduct. 
It is a wonderful thing to discover yoga, a spiritual methodology that works 
according to precise principles, having nothing to do with the ups and downs, highs 

and lows, of haphazard religious endeavors. There are no hit-or-miss random 
payo
"
s or the whims of a pleased or displeased deity in the life of a yogi. The 

results are very real and very exact. If the aspirant has learned yoga that will lead to 
realization of the Self, a determined resolve to gain higher awareness and the will 
power needed to practice the yoga faithfully and skillfully is all that is needed. 

Leaving behind the Master/Slave syndrome of ignorant religion (along with that of 
false yoga and false gurus and their attendant toxic guru/disciple enslavement), the 
yogi moves onward to the revelation of his divine Self as an integral and eternal part 

of God.
But there are very deÞnite and necessary qualiÞcations for the aspiring yogi, and 
Krishna is about to explain them to us. So to I am going to divide the above verses 

into a Òyogi list.Ó
258
A yogi:
hates no being
is friendly and compassionate
is free from attachment to possessions

is free from egotism
is indi
"
erent to pain and pleasure
is patient

is always contented and balanced in mind
is self-controlled
is one whose conviction is Þrm

is one whose mind and intellect are Þxed on God
is devoted to God
does not agitate [trouble] the world

is not agitated [troubled] by the world
is freed from joy
is freed from envy

is freed from fear
is freed from distress [anxiety]
is free from wants

is pure
is capable
is disinterested

is free from anxiety
has abandoned all undertakings
neither rejoices nor hates

grieves not
desires not
has renounced the pleasant and the unpleasant

is alike toward enemy and friend
is the same in honor and dishonor [disgrace]
alike [indi
"
erent] in cold and heat

alike in pleasure and pain
freed from attachment
indi
"
erent to blame or praise

is silent
is content with anything whatever
is homeless [in his heart, abiding only in God]

is steady-minded
Five times in these verses Krishna comments that such a one Òis dear to me.Ó It 
is easy to see why.
To conclude the subject Krishna says:
Those who honor this immortal dharma just described, endued with faith, 
259
deeming me the Goal Supreme, devotedÐthey are exceedingly dear to me 
(12:20).
The only comment needed here is for me to point out that the wisdom taught by 
Krishna is not philosophy or theology but a way of life. We should always keep this 

in mind.
260
The Field and Its Knower
The question
The opening words of the Gita are 
Dharmakshetre Kurukshetre
ÐThe Þeld of 
Dharma, the Þeld of the Kurus. The entire discourse takes place on the battleÞeld of 
Kurukshetra in North India. Naturally the Gita is considered symbolic as well as 

literal and historical. The Þrst symbol to be considered is ÒÞeld.Ó The thirteenth 
chapter of the Gita is all about that. It opens with a question.
Arjuna said: Prakriti and Purusha, the Field and the Knower of the Field, 
knowledge, and that which should be knownÐI wish to know this, O Krishna.
This verse is not found in all texts of the Gita. As pointed out before in this 
commentary, the Gita is really an exposition of Sankhya philosophy, the original 
philosophy of the upanishadic sages. The prime concept of Sankhya is that of the 
divine duality of purusha and prakritiÐmatter and spirit, energy and consciousness. 
This concerns every person looking to understand his present situation and his 

potential attainment. It is not without signiÞcance that in his question Arjuna puts 
Prakriti before Purusha. Being a yogi, he knows that we must deal with the 
material-energy side of things before we can hope to know about spiritual matters. 

Also, he implies the threefold mystery: knower, knowing, and known. Separating 
them into their true boundaries is essential for us.
The overview
Krishna begins with an overview of the question.
The Holy Lord said: This body is called the Field, and he who knows this is 
called the Knower of the FieldÐso say the knowers of these things (13:1).
This is very clear. Because we sow seeds of action in it, and reap their fruits, the 
body is our Þeld, and we, as the experiencer of both sowing and reaping, of karma, 

are the knower of the Þeld, though we often fail to understand what we perceive.
And know me also to be the Knower of the Field in all Þelds. The 
knowledge of the Field and the Knower of the Field I consider to be 
the
 
knowledge (13:2).
Know me also to be the Knower of the Field in all Þelds
. It is great wisdom to know that 
we are an immortal, unchanging consciousness that is witnessing the drama of the 

mortal and ever-changing ÞeldÐboth the little Þeld of our own body and life-sphere 
and the greater Þeld of the cosmos and the cycles of creation/dissolution. And it is 
greater wisdom to know that God is the Knower of all Þelds, small and greatÐthat 

God is experiencing our life right along with us. This a great wonder. And so:
The knowledge of the Field and the Knower of the Field I consider to be 
the
 knowledge
.
It is not enough to know the Knower, we must also know the Known. Self-
knowledge is not enough; that which is not the Self must also be known. Awareness 
of the not-Self (
anatma
) must also be there, as Buddha pointed out. We must learn 
261
what is not us and what is, so when we encounter the bewildering vagaries of the 
Þeld we can be at peace and say: ÒThat is not Ôme.ÕÓ IdentiÞcation with the body is 
one of our greatest errorsÐit must be seen as the phantom it really is. This is why 
yoga has so much to say about the Þeld. We must recognize and master it so the 

knower-Self can fully manifest within and through it.
The FieldÐwhat it is and of what kind, what its modiÞcations are, whence 
they come and what are the KnowerÕs powers, that hear from me in brief. 

This has been sung many times by the rishis in many sacred chants, in 
passages about Brahman 
[Brahma Sutras]
, full of convincing reasoning 
(13:3-4).
This great knowledge is completely traditional, and Krishna is reminding Arjuna 
of this fact. There is no Ònew yoga for a new age.Ó Rather, there is eternal yoga for 
the eternal spirit. That is what the Gita is all about.
The Þeld
The great elements, the consciousness of ÒIÓ [ahankara], intellect and the 
unmanifest, the ten senses and one, and the Þve Þelds of actions of the 
senses, desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, the whole organism, consciousness, 
stabilityÐthus is the Field brießy described, and its aspects (13:5-6).
This is certainly complex, but it is also very clear. Basically everything we know 
in a objective manner is the Þeld. If we can perceive, recall, and name anything, it is 

part of the Þeld and should be known as such and never identiÞed with. All Krishna 

has listed is anatma: not-Self.
Preparation for knowledge
There is no need for Krishna to talk about the knower of the Þeld at this point, 
for it would be mere theory. Instead we must prepare our minds for such 
knowledge. So Krishna continues:
Absence of pride, freedom from hypocrisy, harmlessness [ahimsa], 
fortitude, rectitude, approaching a teacher, purity, constancy and self-control,

detachment from the objects of sense, absence of egotism, keeping in mind 

the evils of birth, death, old age, disease, and pain, non-attachment, absence 
of clinging to son, wife, home and suchlike; constant even-mindedness in 
desired and undesired events, unswerving devotion to me with single-minded 

yoga, living in secluded places, having distaste for association with many 
people, establishment in the knowledge of the Supreme Self, keeping in mind 
the goal of knowledge of the truthÐthis is said to be true knowledge. The 

contrary is ignorance (13:7-11).
How simpleÐand what a lifetime project to fulÞll! Whatever goes contrary to this 
is ignorance and must be ruthlessly ejected from our lives and minds.
The knower of the Þeld
Krishna now will describe the cosmic Knower in all Þelds, but in reading it we 
262
must not forget that everything he says applies also in a Þnite degree to our 
individual Self.
I shall explain that which must be known, knowing which one attains 
immortality: the beginningless, Supreme Brahman, which is said to be neither 

being nor non-being 
[existent nor non-existent]
 (13:12).
ÒExistentÓ and Ònon-existentÓ are terms proper only to relative existence with 
its constant change, including the great changes of birth and death. To be eternal is 

not to exist forever, but to be completely beyond the possibility of either existence 
or non-existence in relativity. Absoluteness is the goal.
With hands and feet everywhere, eyes, heads and faces everywhere, with 
ears throughout the universeÐTHAT stands, enveloping everything (13:13).
ÒHaving ears everywhereÓ is a translation of 
sarvatahshrutimal loke
ÐÒhaving 
hearing in all the world.Ó Immediately there comes to mind the meaning of 
Avalokiteshvara or Kuan Yin: ÒHearing the Sounds of the World.Ó God hears not 
just the prayers but the words and thoughts of all human beings and the cries of all 
animals and even plants. This is because God pervades the world and is within all 

things as their Knower.
Having the appearance of all the qualities of the senses, yet free of all the 
senses, unattached yet maintaining all, free from the gunas, yet experiencing 

the gunas (13:14).
Part of divine omniscience is the experiencing of all things. God is separate, yet 
he fully experiences everything through everyone. Every sentient being is a door of 

his perception. He experiences the internal and external sensations and impulses of 
all sentient beings. Great yogis reßect this to some degree. In the thirty-Þfth chapter 
of his autobiography Yogananda narrates the following about Yogiraj Lahiri 

Mahasaya:
ÒThe masterÕs omnipresence was demonstrated one day before a group of 
disciples who were listening to his exposition of the
 Bhagavad Gita.
 As he was 
explaining the meaning of
 Kutastha Chaitanya
 or the Christ Consciousness in all 
vibratory creation, Lahiri Mahasaya suddenly gasped and cried out:
ÒÔI am drowning in the bodies of many souls o
"
 the coast of Japan!Õ

ÒThe next morning the chelas read a newspaper account of the death of many 
people whose ship had foundered the preceding day near Japan.Ó
Yogananda experienced this himself on a small scale, as he relates in Chapter 
Thirty of 
Autobiography of a Yogi
:
ÒI sat one morning in my little attic room in FatherÕs Gurpar Road home. For 
months World War I had been raging in Europe; I reßected sadly on the vast toll of 

death.
ÒAs I closed my eyes in meditation, my consciousness was suddenly transferred 
to the body of a captain in command of a battleship. The thunder of guns split the 

air as shots were exchanged between shore batteries and the shipÕs cannons. A huge 
shell hit the powder magazine and tore my ship asunder. I jumped into the water, 
together with the few sailors who had survived the explosion.
263
ÒHeart pounding, I reached the shore safely. But alas! a stray bullet ended its 
furious ßight in my chest. I fell groaning to the ground. My whole body was 
paralyzed, yet I was aware of possessing it as one is conscious of a leg gone to sleep.
ÒÔAt last the mysterious footstep of Death has caught up with meÕ I thought. 
With a Þnal sigh, I was about to sink into unconsciousness when lo! I found myself 

seated in the lotus posture in my Gurpar Road room.Ó
Outside and inside beingsÐthe animate and the inanimateÐ
incomprehensible because of its subtlety, far away and also near, undivided, 

yet remaining as if divided in beings, this is to be known as the sustainer of 
beings, their absorber and generator (13:15-16).
All this is done for the sake of sentient beingsÐfor their evolution in 
consciousness. Even our bodies are really produced by God for us to inhabit. It is 

true, however much the philosophically ÒsophisticatedÓ may sneer: 
We are the center 
of the universe, its purpose for existing
. Of course ÒweÓ includes all sentient beings, and 
everything is potentially sentient. From this we see that God is not just Father and 
Mother, he is also Companion and Servant. Blessed are those that give this God his 

due: their entire heart and life.
Also this is said to be the light of lights, beyond all darkness; knowledge, 
the to-be-known, the goal of knowledge seated in the heart of all (13:17).
He is the reality of everything internal and externalÐthe Òone thing realÓ that 
alone is worthy of our involvement.
Thus Field, knowledge and that which must be known has been brießy 
stated. Comprehending all this, my devotee approaches my state of being 
(13:18).
So we see how essential this knowledge is, and nothing, including religion, can 
be substituted for it.
264
Interaction of Purusha and Prakriti
Before continuing, we should Þrst be reminded that what is said of Brahman and 
Prakriti is also to be applied to the individual spirit, the purusha, and its individual 
energy levels or prakriti.
Beginningless source
Know that both Prakriti and Purusha are beginningless; and know that the 
modiÞcations and the gunas arise from Prakriti (13:19).
This verse is quite pivotal for our correct understanding. First of all, both 
prakriti and purusha are eternalÐwithout beginning, and therefore without end. 
This means that prakriti is not a dream or mirage, something that will cease to exist 

when realization is attained, though our mistaken ideas about prakriti will melt 
away. Prakriti is like the screen in a theatre. The movie will end, but the screen will 
remain. Next, all things originate in prakriti, and so do their modiÞcations; for the 

gunas, the primal building blocks of manifestation, themselves are prakriti. (The 
next chapter will be about the three gunas.)
Two important ideas come into play here: 1) Nothing ever comes from spirit 
(purusha) or is done by spirit. 2) As Poe said: ÒAll that we see or seem is but a 

dream within a dreamÓÐnamely, prakriti, the creative energy.
Therefore, although we must never forget our essential nature as spirit, 
everything in our experienceÐin the ÞeldÐis an objectiÞcation of mula-prakriti, the 

root-energy from which all things are formed. For this reason yoga is very much a 
matter of prakriti, for it is prakriti that needs to be reÞned and evolved to become a 

perfect reßection of the purusha. That alone is liberation. So yogis pay great 
attention to such things as diet and health. Meditation practice itself entails certain 
necessary elements, which is why Patanjali lists asana, pranayama, pratyahara, and 

dharana as prerequisites for meditation.
To cultivate a false, abstract Òspiritual-mindednessÓ that denies or ignores 
prakriti is to be in error. For:
Prakriti is declared to be the cause of that which is to be done, the 
instrument and the doer. The Purusha is declared to be the cause in the 

experiencing of pleasure and pain (13:20).
This verse is extremely di
!
cult to translate. The idea is that prakriti is the 
source of both action and the instrument of action, but purusha is the source of the 

internal experiences and internal reactions, our experience of pleasure and pain that 

result from the movements of prakriti. Consciousness is an attribute of the 
purusha. The more conscious we areÐthe more we identify with consciousness itself 
rather than objects of consciousnessÐthe more ÒrealÓ we are.
The knower in the Þeld
265
The Purusha abiding in Prakriti experiences the gunas of Prakriti; 
attachment to the gunas is the cause of its birth in good and evil wombs 
(13:21).
This is really rather simple. We experience the di
"
erent modes (gunas) of 
materiality, and our reaction to themÐwhether positive or negativeÐintensely 

attaches our awareness to prakriti. The character of our attachment/aversion 
determines the kind of birth we will have. Most translators employ the expression 

Ògood and evil wombs,Ó and Prabhavananda has Òpure or impure,Ó but the Sanskrit 
says 
sadasadyonijanmasu
Ðbirth in real (sat) and unreal (asat) wombs, or birth in true/
real or false wombs. This is a purely psychic/spiritual expression.
Sentient beings within prakriti exist in a vast scale, from totally ignorant and 
basically unconscious up to subtle and expanded consciousness that approximates 
and reßects the Consciousness that is Brahman. It is this degree of reßection of the 

divine consciousness that determines how real or unreal the birth and body will be. 
The closer to God we are, the more real we are, and the further away we are, the 
more unreal we are.
This is completely psychological, not spatial. Nevertheless it should make us 
think carefully about every aspect of our life, including those we associate with. 

How real are we, and how real is our life? If we wish to approach Reality and unite 

with it, this is a basic requisite. A sure sign that an aspirant will fail in spiritual life 
is his neglect of this crucial scrutiny. It is an extension of the adage: If You Fail to 
Plan, You Plan to Fail.
A bit of reßection. It is so common for spiritual aspirants to say that they are 
di
"
erent from their families, that they feel alien to them, etc. But this cannot be 

true. We are only born in families of people with whom we have a deep a
!
nity. 

True, that a
!
nity may be more subconscious than conscious, but it is there and is a 
force to be reckoned with. We have no doubt all known people who denounced 
their parents or family for traits which they themselves possessed. I knew a 

scrupulously honest young man who was born into a family of low-level criminals. 
It would have been wisdom for him to realize that criminality was latent in him and 
watch his mind carefully to guard against it. Again, we all know people who 

rebelled and cut the cord and got away only to return after some years and become 
exactly like their parents. Look at the militant hippies of the sixties. Most of them 
became more bourgeois than their parents. Jane Fonda became a Cub Scout den 

mother! ÒSadhu, bewareÓ is always wise counsel.
We have really completed the subject of Prakriti, though it will be mentioned 
again, so now I would like to make a summation of the subject. To do this we must 

consider the very common concept of Shiva-Shakti. Shiva is Consciousness and 
Shakti is Energy. They are Unity seeming to be Duality. Shiva is Shakti, and when 
there is no more need for manifestation/creation whatsoever, Shakti merges in 

ShivaÐor rather, is revealed as Shiva. As Sri Ramakrishna frequently pointed out, 
Brahman and Shakti are like Þre and its power to burn.
We need to understand the actions and e
"
ects of Prakriti-Shakti, especially as it 
266
a
"
ects us, but always keeping in mind that Shiva alone exists. I am making a point 
of this because some teachers in India maintain that Prakriti is just a kind of inert 
lump that exists coeternally with Brahman and becomes shaped into moving 
manifestations when Brahman ÒentersÓ Prakriti as Ishwara. This is an impossibility. 

Only Purusha, either inÞnite or Þnite, really exists. Prakriti/Shakti is only the 
thought, the dream, of Brahman/Shiva. We have to talk about it because we are 
presently in the net woven of creative energy by the will of the Weaver: Brahman/

Ishwara.
Many facets
The Supreme Spirit in this body is called the witness and the consenter, 
the supporter, the experiencer, the Great Lord, and also the Supreme Self 
(13:22).
Let us take this a bit at a time.
The Supreme Spirit [Parampurusha]
. These are all titles of the One who is incarnate 
in the universe and in all bodies. These major titles reveal its function within 
matter. We are considering the Absolute here, not any intermediary or secondary 
aspect or secondary form-manifestation of the Supreme or our own spirit.
 
All is 
under the direct control of God, and of us, as well. 
Ishwara
 means the ruler, the 
controller. Just as God is the Great Ruler, so are we on the individual level. We are 

in total control of our personal life-sphere. True, that control depends on the 
supreme control of God, but it is none the less absolute, though Þnite.
In this body. 
In its essential nature, Purusha is beyond any designation or 
discussion, but when it enters into embodimentÐthe Supreme Purusha as the 

cosmos or the individual purusha as a relative, incarnate beingÐthen we can speak 

about it.
The witness
. 
Upadrashta
 means that the purusha perceives everythingÐnothing is 
left unknown to it. This applies both macrocosmically and microcosmically. But 

equally important is its implication that the purusha is always observing, but itself 
is never the actor nor does it become somehow transmuted into what it witnesses. 
In no way does it become part of what it sees. This eternal objectivity is a prime 

trait of the spirit.
The consenter
. 
Anumanta
 is a very interesting word. It means someone who 
consents, permits, and even approves something. The idea is that both God and the 

individual spirit have agreed to the process of evolutionary creation. We did not just 
get dumped here by a deity who gave us no choice. We decided to enter into relative 
being, and on the strength of that act of will we did so. We have agreed to 

everything that has happened to us, from when we were manifesting as an atom of 
hydrogen and all along up the scale to right now. You are only reading these words 
because you have already decided to in your higher mind. And your reaction to 

them will be determined accordingly. Now please understand that consent is not 
approval and enjoyment. We see just by looking back in this life that we have done 
things that did not merit approval, that we should not have desired. For example, 
267
revenge may be sweet for some temperaments, but it is never right or worthy of us. 
Yet, when we agreed to come onto the playing Þeld we were aware of what might 
befall us.
We allow everything that happens to us, because it is necessary for our learning. 
We have always, from a long time ago and far beyond this world, permitted the 

whole thing. We are not being helplessly carried along, though the ego-mind thinks 
so. Yes, we even approve of all the past, present, and future, for ultimately it will 

lead to our perfection in God. The little steps along the way may be miserable and 
even contemptible, but however mucky or chancy the rungs of the ladder may be, 
they get us to the top, and once we step o
"
 into freedom it will all be seen as well 

worth the doing
The supporter
. Nothing exists without the substratum of Spirit. It supports and 
bears up all that is. So it is called 
bharta
.
The experiencer
. This is very interesting. We have already been told that spirit is 
seeing everything, but now the word 
bhokta
 tells us that it also
 feels
 it as well as sees 
it objectively. So the spirit is both objective and subjective, both transcendent and 

immanent, yet without really becoming anything other than what it eternally is. 
This is a crucial insight. Further, it tells us that ignorance, indi
"
erence, or 
numbness in relation to the world is not spiritual but degraded. We see this in the 

saints. They are more conscious, more reactive and more involved than anyone else, 
yet they remain ever what they truly are, and never forget it at any time. They are 
both ÒhereÓ and Òthere,Ó just as is God.
What a storehouse of deepest wisdom is the Bhagavad Gita! You can see how 
necessary it is to delve into the Sanskrit text. Learning Sanskrit as an additional 

language is a herculean labor, but with a few good dictionaries and word-for-word 

translations (especially SargeantÕs) you can mine the treasures for yourself.
Transcending rebirth
He who thus knows the Purusha and Prakriti along with the gunas, 
whatever be his state of evolution, he shall never be born again (13:23).
This means that anyone who turns toward knowledge of the Self, of Spirit, can 
come to that knowledge and be free from rebirth in the material plane. This does 
not mean that a person can live in any vile or foolish manner, then get religious and 
escape the consequences of his actions. Nevertheless it is true, as Krishna has said, 

that even the worst person who resolves to purify himself can succeed, but that is a 
coping with evil, not a jumping over it or a circumventing of the moral law. This is, 
certainly, a statement of great hope and optimism. No matter what our present 

degree of evolution may be, whatever our present situation, if we go directly to the 
heart of things and experience and manifest the Self, then there will be no more 
need for birth in this lowest of worlds. Consequently this subject of the Þeld and 

the knower of the Þeld is vital for us.
Ways of gaining this knowledge
268
In the next two verses Krishna is going to give a broad outline of the ways in 
which we can come to know the Þeld and its knower.
Some perceive the Self in the Self by the Self through meditation, others 
by Sankhya yoga, and still others by karma yoga (13:24).
The Þrst half of this is an explanation of what authentic meditation really is. All 
that glitters is not gold, and all that is called meditation is not really meditation. 
Krishna will help us determine what is real meditation.
Meditation is the process by which we Òperceive the Self in the Self by the Self.Ó 
We both start and end with the Self. We do not bother with anything that is not the 

Self. Meditation is direct, immediate experience of the Self. Just as it takes a while 

to take in a vista reaching from horizon to horizon, in the same way it can take time 
to fully see the Self in its inÞnity, but still we start out perceiving it, even if only in 
the form of the peace and stillness that is a trait of the Self.
How is the Self the means by which we perceive the Self? When you eat salt you 
know what salt is. Nothing else will give you an idea of the nature of salt. Nothing 

is needed to lead up to the experience of salt except salt itself: just taste it. It is the 

same with meditation that reveals the Self. First we must take hold of the Self as an 
instrument of perception.
Krishna then tells us that by jnana yoga, study of the Sankhya philosophy along 
with pondering on its principles, the seeker can also gain glimpses of the truth of 

the Self. This is because Òthoughts are things,Ó and the Sankhya philosophy is the 
thought of the sage Kapila, about whom Krishna has already said: ÒAmong the 

siddhas, I am the sage Kapila.Ó When we study the teachings of Kapila we will 
absorb some of the power of his enlightenment that lies behind his words. It is a 
matter of vibration. And the same is true of the Gita, which is why we should read 

it every day till the end of our lives.
Also Krishna says that the Self can be intuited by those that engage rightly and 
wholeheartedly in karma yogaÐacting with the consciousness that the Self alone is 

real while dedicating each action to God, the Supreme Self.
In the next verse Krishna says:

Others, also, not knowing thus yet hearing from others, worship. They 
also cross beyond death, devoted to what they have heard (13:25).
Krishna is not talking about just any kind of teaching, but rather the teaching of 
the ancient sages. If we carefully study them, learning from those that have 

understood them, and apply them as best we can, we shall rise above the death of 
material consciousness and enter into spiritual awareness that in time will bring us 
into complete understanding and the capacity for liberating yoga practice. It is all in 

the doing.
269
Seeing The One Within the All
The One in all
Krishna now concludes the subject of the Þeld and the knower of the Þeld, 
pointing out the results of seeing their nature and their union.
Know this: whatever is born, the animate or the inanimate, know it to be 
resulting from the union of the Field and the Knower of the Field (13:26).
All that exists within the Þeld of relativity, even if only momentarily, has arisen 
from the interaction of the Þeld (prakriti) and the knower of the Þeld (purusha), 
that are really one and the same. For ÒcreationÓ is a dream of the purusha, though 
inÞnitely more stable and lasting than our nightly dreams.
Regarding those who wake from the cosmic dream, Krishna says:
He who sees the Supreme Lord existing in all beings equally, not dying 
when they dieÐhe sees truly (13:27).
What a glorious vision! And Krishna uses the term ParameshwaraÐSupreme 
LordÐfor he is speaking of a very personal seeing of God, not some abstract 
metaphysical Principle. God is indeed Principle, but so much more besides. To ever 
see God, to not have the world be a veil but a window, is possible to the yogi, a 

sublime possibility. For such a one: ÒDeath is swallowed up in victoryÓ (I 
Corinthians 15:54).
The One in him
Truly seeing the same Lord existing everywhere, he injures not the Self by 
the lower self. Then he goes to the Supreme Goal (13:28).
Unpleasant as the fact may be, people live in continual violation of their spirit-
nature. Daily they outrage their divine Self in a multitude of ways, all of which have 
the single e
"
ect of burying, even su
"
ocating, their Self, of dethroning and degrading 

itÐat least within this plane of relative existence, even though the Self can never be 
diminished or harmed in the transcendental realm. The way human beings live is a 
kind of constant attempted murder of their own deathless being. This is a terrible 

mode of life, and the world around us reveals the results.
Although nearly all of the world continues to repeat the same deadly folly, we as 
individuals need not do so. We can make our heart and our home a haven of peace, 

an abode of Consciousness. It is all a matter of reÞning and elevating our usual 
state of mind through japa and meditation, of thus Òtruly seeing the same Lord 
existing everywhereÓ around us. Freed from the lie of ego, we come to know who 

and what we really are, and our eternal relationship with God.
He who himself sees thus: that all actions are performed exclusively by 
Prakriti, and perceives that therefore he is himself not the doerÐhe sees truly 

(13:29).
In the midst of Òchange and decay all around I see,Ó the yogi is undisturbed, 
270
because he knows that prakriti alone is moving, changing, breaking up, and 
recombiningÐthat the Self is untouched by all that, the unmoving witness of it all. 
As Yogananda continually reminded his students, Òthis is all just movies.Ó The 
movie is not ultimately real, but the movie-viewers are. And when the show is over 

they will leave the theater and go home where they belong without a backward 
look.
When he perceives the various states of being as resting in the One, and 
their expansion from that One aloneÐhe then attains Brahman (13:30).
First we see the truth of the individual Self, and then we are enabled to know 
the Supreme Self. All states and forms of existence come from Brahman and ever 
remain within Brahman. The entire cosmos is a great ritual of Consciousness. As 
the fourth chapter says: ÒBrahman is the o
"
ering, Brahman is the oblation poured 
out by Brahman into the Þre of Brahman. Brahman is to be attained by him who 

always sees Brahman in action.Ó This being so:
This eternal Supreme Self, without beginning and devoid of gunas, even 
though dwelling in the body, does not act, nor is it tainted. As the all-

pervading ether because of its subtlety is not tainted, so the Self seated in the 
body is not tainted at any time in any situation. As the sun alone illumines 
this entire world, so the Lord of the Þeld illumines the entire Þeld. Those who 

know through the eye of knowledge the distinction between the Field and the 
Knower of the Field, and the liberation of beings from PrakritiÐthey go to the 
Supreme (the Highest) (13:31-34).
This is no intellectual exercise, but Òknowledge combined with 
realizationÓ (9:1). Once we know the di
"
erence between purusha and prakriti, and 

how to distance ourselves from the prakriti-dream, we are on the way to freedom 

from bondage in this or any other world.
271
The Three Gunas
In chapter three the subject of the gunas was introduced. They were brießy 
mentioned in chapter four, and now this fourteenth chapter is devoted to them. The 
Þrst two verses are reminiscent of others we have encountered already:
Highest wisdom
The Holy Lord said: Again I shall explain to you the highest of 
knowledges, the best of all knowledge, having known which all the sages 
attained to the highest perfection. Resorting to this knowledge they attain 
identity with me. At creation they are not born, nor do they tremble at its 
dissolving (14:1-2).
Simplistic, linear, two-dimensional thinking characterizes Western thought, 
including religion. In some instances the entire range of ordinary religious beliefs 

can be summed up in a moderate-sized paragraph. Neatly tied up theological and 

philosophical packages are the delight of the Western mind. As I. K. Tamini points 
out in 
The Science of Yoga
, there is little interest in the reality of the theories as long 
as they hang together, are logical, and sound right. The competing Western 
ideologies are mostly empty packaging, hollow boxes whose appeal lies only in their 
external impression. As the prophet said: ÒA wonderful and horrible thing is 
committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by 

their means; and my people love to have it soÓ (Jeremiah 5:30-31).
In contrast we have the rich, multilevel, and wide-embracing philosophies of the 
East, philosophies that are demonstrable, whose esoteric principles are proven by 

the observable changes in those that fulÞll them. Much of the time they appear 
inconsistent, even contradictory, but that is a characteristic of reality itself. They 
often say the same thing about di
"
ering subjects. For example, in Hinduism all the 

sahasranamavalis (collections of one thousand titles) addressed to various deities 
declare each of them to be the only true deity, and a great deal of the same titles are 
attributed to them all. It is, furthermore, usual for a Hindu to recite several of these 

over a period of time without any unease whatsoever. I have known yogis who 
would say: ÒThe one thing you need isÉ,Ó and then name di
"
ering things at 
di
"
erent times. Of course. Sanatana Dharma does not Òmake sense,Ó it 
is
 sense, and 
it makes the adherent sensible.
More than once already, Krishna has stated his intention to give us the highest 
wisdom. And has spoken di
"
erently each time. Now he does it again, but giving us 

an understanding of what true wisdom really does for the wise.
Beyond this wisdom there is simply nothing more to be known, because 
Wisdom and Brahman are the same. That is, Truth is not a set of intellectual ideas, 

but Reality itself. When someone asked Shankara: ÒWhat is Truth [Satya]?Ó he 
answered: ÒThere is no such thing as Truth, there is only The True [Sat].Ó This is 
272
because Shankara was a yogi, not a mere philosopher, and he knew that Òknowledge 
combined with realization, which having known you shall be free from evilÓ (9:1), 
was the only thing that really mattered.
Knowledge (jnana) must be sought for. True, it is already inside us, but what 
value is that to us who are blind to it? We must open our eyes or remove the debris 

that separates us from it. In the newborn infant are all the faculties and powers of 
the adult. Yet that means nothing to the infant. In time the inner seeds will 

manifest and adulthood be gained. It is the same with us. There is a necessary 
search for Truth, but that search must be an inner search, the practice of yoga.
The Supreme Perfection attained by the sages is Brahman, InÞnity itself. It is not 
mere freedom from fault or a plenitude of good attributes. It is a transcending of 

the condition in which good or bad, vice or virtue, can existÐa transcendence in 
which there is not even the possibility of their existence.
United with Brahman, the Brahman-nature was living through the sages, for it 
was
 them. ÒThis is the divine state; having attained this, he is not deluded. Fixed in 

it even at the time of death, he attains BrahmanirvanaÓ (2:72).
ÒAt creation they are not born, nor do they tremble at its dissolving.Ó Having no 
longer any need for the cosmic school, they have graduated from the plane of 

relativity. They are not compelled to take birth in a future creation cycle, nor are 

they dispossessed of a body-dwelling when the universe dissolves. They have moved 
beyond all such cycles into Original Being. They experience the fulÞllment of JesusÕ 
prayer: ÒO Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had 

with thee before the world wasÓ (John 17:5).
Prakriti: the originating womb
For me great Brahma is the womb, and in that do I place the seed. The 
origination of all beings comes from that. Whatever be the forms produced 
within all wombs, the great Brahma is their womb, and I the seed-casting 

Father (14:3-4).
Brahma is the creator of the three lower levels of the seven-level creation. Since 
creation is really only a dream, the egg or seed of that dream is placed within his 

consciousness, and all develops from there. Creation is often spoken of as an egg 
(garbha) in Sanskrit texts. And that egg is prakriti, so that subject is being 
continued here. Just as an egg is warmed in order for it to hatch, so Brahma focuses 

his consciousness on the prakriti-egg, and its potentials are realized. So both 
Brahma and prakriti are the wombs of all things.
Prakriti is the great Þeld of creative energy, but the seeds planted therein are the 
individual spirits who are evolving through the vast span of creation cycles. Thus, 

Prakriti is our mother and Brahma is our fatherÐthe only real parents we will ever 
have, all others being but temporary reßections of these divine archetypes. We need 

to realize that we are divine in origin, and that our purpose in being here is to 
manifest our innate divinity. We must also keep in mind that since there is only 
One, Prakriti is really Purusha, that what we mistake for matter is really Spirit. 
273
Although there appear to be many separate beings, in essence they are one in 
Brahman.
All forms within Prakriti are really only modiÞcations and combinations of the 
three gunas. So Krishna continues:
Sattwa, rajas, and tamasÐthese gunas born of Prakriti bind fast in the body 
the imperishable embodied one (the Atman) (14:5).
The gunas are not three things, but qualities of the energy that is Prakriti. They 
are modes or functions of energy. The primal energy moves in three di
"
erent ways. 
So the gunas are not things of themselves, only appearances. But very signiÞcant 
appearances.
The three gunas are called sattwa, rajas, and tamas. When we experience them 
as real, they bind and limit us to body consciousness, making us undergo change 

and death, even though we are unchanging and immortal. So the three gunas are 

the basic forces of illusion. It is interesting that there are three primary colors 
whose combinations make all other colors. Without these three we would never see 
any colors.
The next thirteen verses deal with the gunas, moving back and forth between 
them. To make it much easier to understand their di
"
erences, I will Þrst give the 

thirteen verses relating to them, and then separate the verses into three sections so 

we can look at one guna at a time in depth.
The three gunas
Of these, sattwa is stainless, luminous, and health-giving; it binds by 
attachment to happiness and by attachment to knowledge. Know rajasÕ nature 
is passion arising from thirst and attachment; it binds fast the embodied one 

by attachment to action. Know indeed that tamas is born of ignorance, 
deluding all embodied ones. It binds by distraction, laziness and sleep.
Sattwa causes attachment to happiness, rajas causes attachment to action; 
and tamas, veiling knowledge, causes attachment to delusion.
Sattwa prevails over rajas and tamas; and rajas prevails over sattwa and 
tamas; and tamas prevails over sattwa and rajas.
When the light of knowledge shines in all the gates of the body, then it 
should be known that sattwa is dominant. Greed, activity, undertaking of 
actions, restlessness, and desireÐthese arise when rajas is dominant. 

Darkness, inertia, heedlessness and delusionÐthese arise when tamas is 
dominant.
When the embodied one dies when sattwa is dominant, then he enters the 
stainless realms of the knowers of the Highest. Dying in rajas, he is born 

amid those attached to action. Dying in tamas, he is born from the wombs of 
the deluded.
They say the fruit of action performed well, is sattwic and without fault; 
but the fruit of rajas is pain, and the fruit of tamas is ignorance.
From sattwa arises knowledge; and from rajas arises greed; from tamas 
274
arises heedlessness, delusion and ignorance.
Those established in sattwa go upward; the rajasic remain in the middle; 
the tamasic, abiding in the lowest guna, go downward. (14:6-18).
Sattwa
Of these, sattwa is stainless, luminous, and health-giving [salubrious]; it binds by 
attachment to happiness and by attachment to knowledge. 
From this we know that sattwa 
is free from impurityÐfrom any element that obstructs higher consciousness from 
functioning on any level. Further, sattwa illuminates the mind and whatever the 
mind is Þxed upon. Understanding and practical knowledge arise naturally in the 

sattwic mind. Sattwa is free from any defect, either mental or physical. 
Nevertheless, sattwa is as much an element of bondage as rajas or tamas. It binds 
us through attachment to happiness and ease of heart and to the pursuit of spiritual 

wisdom. When these are sought as attributes of the Self, such seeking frees us. But 
if they are sought under the inßuence of sattwa, they are sought for their short-
term beneÞts, only for our personal well-being and understanding. The motive is 

tainted, albeit only as the faintest shadow, by egoic motive.
Sattwa, too, must be shed by the ascending spirit, for: 
Sattwa causes attachment to 
happiness.
Sattwa prevails over rajas and tamas.
 Sattwa is a force of positive introversion, of 
keen awareness of inward states, a condition essential for proÞciency in meditation. 

It is psychic sensitivity, an awareness of subtler realms of being. This is because 

sattwa is fundamentally an orientation toward spiritual ascension which results 
from the dissolving of all lower things. The ultimate sattwa (shuddhasattwa) is a 
melting away of all that is not spirit.
When the light of knowledge shines in all the gates of the body, then it should be known that 
sattwa is dominant.
 Those in whom sattwa predominates are not bewildered by life 

and its experiences. Rather, the sattwic person is ever gaining in understanding, 

being taught by life itself. The sattwic person ÒseesÓ in the fullest sense.
When the embodied one dies when sattwa is dominant, then he enters the stainless realms of 
the knowers of the Highest.
 Being himself a knower, at the time of death he ascends to 

the pure worlds of those established in the highest consciousness, his state of mind 
being in harmony with theirs.
They say the fruit of action performed well (well done), is sattwic and without fault (taint).
 
Action that increases the quality of sattwa in us is the only truly good action. This is 

a necessary lesson for us who seek the Highest, for: 
From sattwa arises knowledge.
And as has been said: 
Those established in sattwa go upward.
 But he must 
abide
 in 
sattwa, be established in sattwa, not just having occasional bouts or ßashes of 

sattwa. Sattwa must be a steady condition.
Rajas
Know rajasÕ nature is passion arising from thirst and attachment; it binds fast the embodied 
one by attachment to action.
 
Rajas produces fevered desire in us, whatever the object 
275
might be. Fundamentally it makes us crave enjoyment and possession of the objects 
of enjoyment. It literally addicts us to actionÐthe shackles of rebirth and karma.
Rajas causes attachment to action.
 Pity the person who says: ÒI am a doer, not a 
thinker,Ó who considers himself Òa man of action,Ó and thinks it is an enviable 

virtue.
Rajas is a consuming monster, for: 
Rajas prevails over sattwa and tamas.
 The 
individualÕs will is wiped out, at least for the moment. In the third chapter Arjuna 

asks: ÒBy what is a man impelled to commit evil, against his own will, as if urged by 
[some] force?Ó (3:36). And Krishna answers: ÒThis [force] is desire, it is anger, that 
is born of the rajo-guna: great consumer and of great evil; know this to be the 

enemyÓ (3:37).
Greed, activity, undertaking of actions, restlessness, and desireÐthese arise when rajas is 
dominant.
 And we are the slaves!
The following are self-explanatory: 
Dying in rajas, he is born amid those attached to 
action. The fruit of rajas is pain. From rajas [arises] greed. [After death,] the rajasic remain in 

the middle.
Tamas
Know indeed that tamas is born of ignorance, deluding all embodied ones; it binds by 
distraction, laziness and sleep[iness]. Tamas, veiling knowledge, causes attachment to delusion 
(negligence).
 When this is seen in anyone or anything, tamas is prevailing and 
enslaving, for Krishna says: 
Tamas prevails over sattwa and rajas
.
Darkness, inertia, heedlessness and delusionÐthese arise when tamas is dominant. Dying in 
tamas, he is born from the wombs of the deluded. 
Commentators say this means that the 
tamasic person is born either to parents of utter stupidity and torpor, or that they 

may even sink to rebirth in a subhuman form.
The fruit of tamas is ignorance. Negligence and delusion arise from tamas, and ignorance 
too; from tamas arises distraction (heedlessness; delusion; confusion) and ignorance.
 That is 

clear to any but the tamasic.
[After death] the tamasic, abiding in the lowest guna, go downward.
 Again, this means 
either birth among the stupid or the subhuman (whatever the form, human or 

animal); and it can also mean sinking into the regions of darkness known as hells.
The three doers
When the beholder sees no doer other than the gunas, and knows that 
which is higher than the gunas, he attains to my being (14:19).
Of course, it is really Prakriti alone that does all things, the gunas simply being 
modes of the Primal Energy. Yogananda usually elucidated these concepts by the 
example of a motion picture. The picture itself is Prakriti, with its colors and forms 
being the gunas, and the white undi
"
erentiated light is the Purusha, the InÞnite. 

(Sometimes he likened Prakriti to the screen.) So everything that happens or that 
we perceive are merely joinings and disjoinings of the gunas. The gunas alone do 
anything. Realizing this we should be stimulated to look beyond the gunas to the 
276
transcendent Spirit which is absolute Unity. Through yoga we can enter into that 
Oneness and be free from the illusions of the gunas.
The conqueror
When an embodied being rises above these three gunas, which are the 
source of the body, freed from birth, death, old age and pain, he attains 
immortality (14:20).
This makes it clear that we do not need some kind of mastery or control over the 
gunas, but rather we require a metaphysical transcendence, an awakening that will 

take us beyond their reach. What to the ignorant are unbreakable bonds then 

become nothing more than cobwebsÐnot even that: mere illusions.
The gunas are not only the source, the material of the body, they are also the 
forces that impel us into imprisonment in the body. When the poet wrote: ÒChange 

and decay all around I see,Ó he was speaking of the gunas. But when he continued: 
ÒO thou that changest not,Ó he was addressing the Self.
Freed from the gunas, and therefore from the body, Òreleased from birth, death, 
old age, and pain, he attains immortality.Ó That is, he knows who he really is and 

dreams no more dreams of the gunas.
Arjuna said: By what marks is he known who has gone beyond the gunas? 
What is his conduct, and how does he go beyond these three gunas? (14:21).
How do we know when the gunas are transcended?
He neither detests the presence nor desires the absence of illumination 
[prakasha]
 or activity 
[pravritti]
 or delusion 
[moha]
(14:22).
This is an important point. We want to transcend the gunas, yet we are to be 
indi
"
erent to their presence or their absence (actually, in this verse, the 
e
!
ects
 of 
their presence or absence.) Non-interaction with them is the secret. But the even 
greater secret is the will and the desire to reach God Who is beyond the gunas. 
Finding God is the real secret. The idea that it is wisdom to just remain in the 

world and wander ÒskillfullyÓ through the maze is absurd. (Like the silly idea that 
being able to make holograms of match-boxes in your mind is a preparation for 
meditation.) God must be the central focus of our consciousness and our life.
We will do well to never forget KrishnaÕs description of the true yogi: ÒHe who 
is steadfast in yoga [yoga-yukta] at all times sees the Self present in all beings and 

all beings present in the Self. 
He who sees me everywhere, and sees all things in meÐI am not 
lost to him, and he is not lost to me
Ó (6:29, 30).
The next three verses are so perfect they need no comment beyond our 
embodying of them.
He who sits apart, indi
"
erent to and unmoved by the gunas, realizing: Òthe 
gunas are operating,Ó stands Þrm and is unwavering. The same in pain or in 

pleasure, self-contained, to whom a clod of earth, a stone, and gold are alike; 

to whom the liked and the unliked are the same, steadfast, to whom blame 
and praise of himself are equal, indi
"
erent in honor and dishonor, impartial 
toward the side of friend or enemy, renouncing all undertakingsÐhe is said to 
277
be beyond the gunas (14:23-25).
How it is done
I have given my ideas about getting beyond the gunas, but these words of 
Krishna far exceed them: THE FORGOING SHOULD NOT BE BOLD LETTERS
And he who serves me with the yoga of unswerving devotion, going 
beyond the three gunas, is Þt for absorption in Brahman. For I am the abode 
of Brahman, the immortal, immutable, abode of everlasting dharma and of 
absolute bliss (14:26-27).
Om Tat Sat Om.
278
The Cosmic Tree
There are certain symbols that are common to many cultures, especially in their 
distant past. One such is the Cosmic Tree. Devotees of WagnerÕs music will well 
remember the 
Welt-Atem
, the World Ash, that grew through the center of the earth, 
and how in 
Die Walkure
 Sigmund draws out the great sword 
Nothung
 (Needful) that 
had been thrust into it by Wotan, his father.
India, too has this symbol:
The Holy Lord said: They speak of the eternal ashwattha tree with roots 
above and branches below, its leaves the Vedic hymns; he who knows it is a 
knower of the Vedas (15:1).
This has both a macrocosmic meaning and a microcosmic one.
The cosmos, physical, astral, and causal, is rooted above in the Supreme 
Consciousness, in Brahman. Everything has originated in Brahman, has Brahman 

for its essential Being. That which is ÒbelowÓ is a manifestation of Brahman.
It is usual to say that the leaves of the tree are the hymns of the Veda, but this 
verse conveys a vital point of the character of relative existence. The word 

chhandamsi
 means poetic meter or rhythm. The meaning is that every thing is simply 

a mode of vibration, an energy-pattern, a variation on the single note of Om, of 
Mulaprakriti, the Primal Energy. Om, the Shabda (Sound) Brahman, is the Root 
Sound of which creation is a series of permutations. Those who know thisÐwhich 

implies knowledge of Purusha and Prakriti and their relationshipÐare knowers of 
the true Knowledge, the eternal veda/vidya.
We are rooted in our own Self and in Brahman, the SelfÕs Self. All that we 
identify with as us are the modes of Prakriti, of Creative EnergyÐwhich is Brahman 

in extension. All things are ÒsongsÓ of God, incarnations of Om, the Pranava.
Now we get more on the individual trees:
Below, above, its branches spread afar, nourished by the gunas. Its buds 
are the sense-objects; and in the world of men below its roots engender 

action (15:2).
The universal ashwattha tree, like the earthly banyan tree, puts down roots from 
its branches, making the one tree into many dependent treesÐan apt symbol of 

Brahman and us. The three gunas are the elements which make up the universal 

and individual trees. The objects of the senses are the buds of the trees which, 
tending downward, make fresh roots in the world. These roots are karmas, both 
action and the results of action.
Its form is not perceptible here in the world, not its end, nor its beginning, 
nor its foundation 
[that which enables it to continue in existence]
. Cutting this 
Þrm-rooted ashwattha tree with the strong axe of non-attachment, (15:3).
As long as our consciousness is centered in this world, in relative existence, in 
the experience of the body, mind, and senses, we cannot possibly comprehend the 
279
true nature and life of the world and our embodiment within it. Therefore we must 
transfer our consciousness to the Spirit-self which is eternally rooted in Brahman. 
Then here and now we will comprehend everything. Just as the kernel of a seed or 
nut when it ripens pulls away from the shell, in the same way as we ripen through 

the practice of meditation we shall become detached from all that is of the world. 
The resulting illumined consciousness (prajna) will be the axe by which we can cut 
through the subsidiary roots of the earthly ashwattha tree.
Writing of this, Dr. I. K. Taimni observed: ÒAccording to the yogic philosophy it 
is possible to rise completely above the illusions and miseries of life and to gain 

inÞnite knowledge, bliss, and power through enlightenment 
here and now
 while we 
are still living in the physical body.É No vague promise of an uncertain 
postmortem happiness this, but a deÞnite scientiÞc assertion of a fact veriÞed by 
the experience of innumerable yogis, saints, and sages who have trodden the path of 

yoga throughout the ages.Ó
This being absolutely so, Krishna concludes:

Then that place is to be sought to which, having gone, they do not return 
again: ÒIn that Primeval Purusha from which streamed forth the ancient 
Power, I take refugeÓ (15:4).
The second half of this verse should be our constant aspiration.
280
Freedom
The great bondage
Without pride or delusion, with the evil of attachment conquered, 
constantly dwelling in the Self, with desires dispelled, freed from the pair of 
opposites known as pleasure and pain, the undeluded reach the eternal Goal 

(15:5).
This is the state of mokshaÐof freedom.

It is possible to waste a lot of time and struggle on things that prove impossible 
to accomplish because we are going about it in the wrong way. This Þrst sentence 
gives us invaluable information about dealing with ego and delusion. ÒHow can I 
get rid of ego?Ó is a constant refrain of those who realize how deadly it can be. 

According to the Gita, pride (ego) and delusion are side-e
"
ects of ignorance. So we 
need to work on ridding ourselves of that. Furthermore, once ignorance is gone, so 
is attachment to the dream-illusions of this world. For our eyes see clearly both the 

truth and the untruth of things.
The most important characteristic of the liberated yogi is living in conscious, 
unbroken union with Spirit, individual and inÞnite. This is the goal of all those 

within the Þeld of relativity. Illuminated consciousness is total fulÞllment, therefore 
within it all desire has melted away. In the same way the experiences of the senses 
no longer control or produce delusive reactions. There is an important implication 

here: the liberated person still experiences the external worldÐit does not vanishÐ
but without identifying with it or being inßuenced by it. This is true mastery. Such 
a state is beyond all change. It cannot be lessened or obscured, for it is Reality itself.
There the sun, moon or Þre illuminate not; going whither they return not, 
for that is my Supreme Abode (15:6).
Eternal spirit
How is it that what the Gita says about us and our inÞnite destiny can be true 
when it seems so beyond anything we know of ourselves? That is because we have 
no idea of our own nature as part of that InÞnite Life that is God. This is why the 
Gita should be our daily study: to keep us reminded. Now Krishna will explain how 
we are in a sense incarnations of Divinity.
Merely a fragment of myself, becoming an eternal jiva in this world of 
jivas, draws to itself the senses, and the mind as the sixth sense, abiding in 

Prakriti (15:7).
Every sentient being is rooted in InÞnite Being and is in an incomprehensible 
way a part of that Being. Our presence is the Presence of God, however much we 

keep that divine aspect of ourselves covered up. At no time are we other than 

eternal beings free within God, but the dream of duality and delusion has overcome 
us. We think we are cut o
"
 from God because we have put on the costume of the 
281
material body with the Þve outer senses and the inner sense of the mind.
There are really two persons inhabiting each body: the individual spirit and the 
Supreme Spirit. Krishna keeps speaking of the Lord (Ishwara) so we will not lose 
sight of that fact, and also so we will realize that the InÞnite Will is always in 

control, however the dream may seem otherwise.
When the Lord takes on a body, and when he leaves it, he takes the senses 
and the mind and goes, like the wind takes the scents from their seats, the 

ßowers and herbs (15:8).
Nothing is really lost to us by death. We take all that matters with us, and we 
bring it back with us in the next birth to continue our evolutionary path. Each life 

a
"
ects us, and we take those inßuences along with us. Because they are so subtle 
they are symbolized as fragrances. But they are none the less real for that.
According to the Upanishads and the Gita, Ishwara lives in the heart, the core, 
of every human being, and experiences all which they experience. Therefore Krishna 

underlines that both the incarnating jivatman and the Paramatman enter and depart 
from the body together. The manner of this is incomprehensible.
Presiding over hearing, sight, touch, taste and smell as well as the mind, 
this Ishwara experiences the objects of the senses (15:9).
Both we and God are witnesses through the senses and mind of all our 
experiences as we incarnate in the many mansions of creation. We seem to undergo 
those experiencesÐwhich we do, but as in a dream. God experiences all that we doÐ
this is a manifestation of our oneness with God. God knows it is a dream, but we do 

not and so we su
"
er.
Two kinds of human beings
Whether departing, remaining or enjoying, accompanied by the gunas, the 
deluded do not see him. Those with the eye of knowledge see him (15:10).
There are two basic divisions in this world: those that do not see God and those 
that do. And those that see God and their own Self never lose sight of those divine 
realities whether incarnate, dying, or experiencing the modes (gunas) of Prakriti. 
The others never see anythingÐbut in time they will, for that is the destiny of all 

sentient beings.
Who sees God?
Who are those that see God? Not the merely religious or virtuous, for Krishna 
continues:
The yogis, striving, behold him dwelling within the Self; but the 
undeveloped and unintelligent, even though striving, see him not (15:11).
Only the adept yogis who have entered into their own spirit-consciousness 
beyond the tossing waves of samsaraÐincluding their own gross and subtle bodiesÐ
see God. And they do not see him outside themselves, but at the very core of their 
being, pervading their own consciousness.
282
Who does not see?
When the scriptures of authentic dharma speak of the ignorant and describe 
their dilemmas, it is never to condemn or despise them, but to inform us who seek 
to be wise. In this verse two words are used to describe those that cannot possibly 

see God, and they tell us much.
The Þrst word is 
akritatmano
, which means one who is unprepared and 
unperfected. Now this is important, for Krishna is not talking of bad or unworthy 

people, but of those who have not evolved su
!
ciently and therefore are unprepared 
for the Divine VisionÐactually incapable of it. This is not a fault, but a stage on the 
way in which all but a fraction of sentient beings presently Þnd themselves. But we 

are hereby told what we need: to prepare ourselves and strive to be more complete 
in mastery of our energy levels and more centered in the consciousness that we 
really are. We need to become steady practicers of yoga.
The other word is 
acetasah
Ðthe unthinking. This includes both those that are 
simply unaware and those that refuse to be aware. There are people that live 

heedlessly throughout life after life, never considering the deeper implications of 

their existence. Even though they have an intellectual belief in God, they do not live 
life in the perspective of that truth. Only those who ponder deeply on the eternal 
mystery of God, man, and life are open to understand and move onward from mere 

thinking about it to actually walking the Way.
283
The All-pervading Reality
Light
That light which resides in the sun, which illumines the whole world, 
which is in the moon and in ÞreÐknow that light to be mine (15:12).
In chapter thirty of his autobiography Paramhansa Yogananda has written the 
following:
ÒAmong the trillion mysteries of the cosmos, the most phenomenal is light. 
Unlike sound-waves, whose transmission requires air or other material media, 
light-waves pass freely through the vacuum of interstellar space. Even the 
hypothetical ether, held as the interplanetary medium of light in the undulatory 
theory, can be discarded on the Einsteinian grounds that the geometrical properties 

of space render the theory of ether unnecessary. Under either hypothesis, light 
remains the most subtle, the freest from material dependence, of any natural 
manifestation.É
ÒÔFiat lux! And there was light.Õ GodÕs Þrst command to his ordered creation 
(
Genesis
 1:3) brought into being the only atomic reality: light. On the beams of this 

immaterial medium occur all divine manifestations. Devotees of every age testify to 

the appearance of God as ßame and light. ÔThe King of kings, and Lord of lords; 
who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach 
unto.Õ (I Timothy 6:15-16)
ÒA yogi who through perfect meditation has merged his consciousness with the 
Creator perceives the cosmical essence as light; to him there is no di
"
erence 

between the light rays composing water and the light rays composing land. Free 

from matter-consciousness, free from the three dimensions of space and the fourth 
dimension of time, a master transfers his body of light with equal ease over the 
light rays of earth, water, Þre, or air. Long concentration on the liberating spiritual 

eye has enabled the yogi to destroy all delusions concerning matter and its 
gravitational weight; thenceforth he sees the universe as an essentially 
undi
"
erentiated mass of light.Ó
Everything is light, for everything is God, who is Light (I John 1:5).
Power
Entering the earth, I support all beings with my energy. Having become 
the watery moon, I cause all plants to thrive (15:13).
Ojas means vitality, vigor, luster, splendor, and energy, including spiritual energy. 
It is the power which accomplishes all things in the cosmos. It is even the power 
within the light of the moon, the power that governs the growth of plants. It is not 
just Divine Power, it is Divinity itself, for God is also Power.
Fire
284
Becoming the digestive Þre, I abide in the body of all living beings. Joined 
with prana and apana, I digest the fourfold food (15:14).
God is Vaishvanara, Cosmic Fire, which includes all forms of manifested Þre, 
including digestive Þre in the bodies of sentient beings. Fire is the most precious 
external element that human beings possess. In our technological age we cannot 
image how essential Þre is, and how necessary it used to be to preserve Þre. The 
scratch of a match, the ßick of a gas-powered lighter, or a turn of a knob produces 

this vital thing. Now the only time we even see Þre is when we cook or make Þre for 
our amusement. It has become as disregarded and taken for granted as God, whose 
manifestation it is.
In ancient times Þre was worshipped or honored as a gift of God and an 
extension of GodÕs being. This was true even in early Christianity. Even now in 

India Þre is saluted when kindled for either cooking or light, and devout Hindus in 

the cities salute the electric light when it is Þrst turned on in the evening.
The all-encompassing Being
What a profound state of consciousness it is to see God in all things at all timesÐ
to understand that Òin him we live, and move, and have our beingÓ (Acts 17:28). To 
underline this Krishna says:
Seated within the hearts of all, from me come memory and knowledge and 
their loss: I alone am to be known by all the Vedas; I am the Author of the 

Vedanta, and the Knower of the Vedas (15:15).
Brahman is in our hearts as the inmost Indweller, the source of our 
consciousness and life. Since everything comes to us from God; so also does their 

departure. Knowledge (understanding) and memory of experience from which 

reason arises, as well as knowledge and memory of our self-nature, come and go, 
originating in and returning to God. For he is the eternal Antaryamin: indweller, 
inner guide, inner ruler, the ÒwitnessÓ who dwells within every living being.
What is found as subject in the writings and discourses of the wiseÐthat is 
Brahman. For there is none other of which to speak. He originates Wisdom, teaches 

Wisdom, and is the Knower of the end of Wisdom: his own Self, Brahman.
The immortal
There are two purushas in this worldÐthe perishable and the imperishable. 
All beings are the perishable, and Kutastha is called the imperishable (15:16).
It is not the spirit that is perishable, but its wrappings, the various sheaths or 
bodies. Yet, the spirit is ÒperishableÓ in its experience of those bodies until it 
awakens to its true nature. In this verse Brahman is called Kutashtha, which means 
changeless, immutable, and Òdweller in the height,Ó or Òon the summit.Ó Unlike 
Brahman, we dwell in the bottom lands and undergo su
"
ering and change.
But there is also the Highest Purusha, called the Supreme Self, the eternal 
Ishwara, Who pervades all the three worlds and sustains them (15:17).
Brahman has two aspectsÐtranscendental and immanent. The previous verse is 
285
speaking of the immanent, the personal Ishwara aspect of God. The perishable 
purushas live within Ishwara and can communicate with him. But our association 
with the personal aspect of God is meant to end when we ourselves become 
transcendental and can pass from all relative worlds into that Absolute beyond all 

relativity.
Since I transcend the perishable and am also above the imperishable, so in 
this world and in the Veda I am known as the Supreme Purusha 

[Purushottama] (15:18).
The impersonality of Brahman can seem barren, even antiseptic, to us who are 
so used to the realm of Ishwara, so Krishna then says:
He who, undeluded, thus knows me as the Supreme Purusha, he, knowing 
all, worships me with his whole being (15:19).
When we truly know Brahman in its transcendent aspect the response is intense 
devotionÐwholehearted worship. Sri Ramana Maharshi is a perfect example of this. 
Though uncompromisingly non-dual in his ways and words, he was deeply 
devotional, often shedding tears of love when hearing the lives and words of saint-

devotees of God. How important it is for us to have this perspective as well is seen 
by KrishnaÕs closing words in this chapter:
This most secret teaching has been imparted by me; awakened to this, a 
man becomes wise and all his duties are fulÞlled (15:20).
286
The Divine and the Demonic
Divine and demonic
In every religious tradition we have the idea of two ways to live in this world or 
two kinds of people to be found in this world. And in each tradition there are 
several forms of this classiÞcation. So now in this sixteenth chapter we Þnd what is 

no doubt the oldest recorded form of this approach. Vyasa postulates that human 
beings are divided into two types: divine and demonic. He uses two Sanskrit words: 
daivim
 and 
asurim
Ðdevic and asuric.
Deva
 literally means Òshining one.Ó Though it is usually applied to highly 
evolved astral beings, in this chapter it refers to people who live in the light of 

spiritual consciousness which illumines their outer life as well. These people were 

called 
Arya
 in more ancient writings and in the teachings of Buddha. Devim, or 
devic, is the inner and outer state of such shining ones, and indicates that they are 

progressing toward liberation.
Asura
 means one who is without light (sura), without spiritual consciousness, 
who has a darkened consciousness, even preferring dark to light. Such persons are 

asuric (asurim), turned away from divinity within and without and moving further 

into degradation of consciousness and life.
This is a grave subject, especially since we often see divine and demonic traits in 
the same person. Such a one must discriminate clearly and eliminate the demonic 

and foster the divine. So in considering this we must not think that if we have a 
preponderance of devic qualities it assures us that all is well. Even the presence of a 
single demonic quality or tendency is of great danger to us lest it draw us away 

from the light into the dark. On the other hand, if in a predominantly demonic 
person we Þnd one or more divine traits we can encourage them to move more into 
the light. For no one ever stands still: we are either moving upward or downward. 

Yet at all times we must remember that the Self of both the daivic and the asuric is 
fundamentally divine.
The divine personality
The Holy Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of being, steadfastness in 
knowledge and yoga, almsgiving, self-control, sacriÞce, self-study 
[swadhyaya]
, 
tapasya, and straightforwardness, non-violence, truthfulness, absence of 
anger, renunciation, tranquillity, without calumny, compassion for beings, 
uncovetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of Þckleness, vigor, patience, 

fortitude, purity, absence of hatred, absence of prideÐthey are the endowment 
of those born to a divine state (16:1-3).
Since this is self-explanatory, I am going to give you the Sanskrit terms and the 
full deÞnitions of the words that have more than one meaning, taken from 
A Brief 
Sanskrit Glossary
.
287
Fearlessness
. Abhaya(m): ÒWithout fear;Ó fearlessness; a state of steadfastness in 
which one is not swayed by fear of any kind; absence of fear.
Purity of being
. Sattwasamshuddhi: Purity of being; purity of heart; purity of 
feeling; increase of light and purity; puriÞcation of oneÕs existence.
Almsgiving
. Danam: ÒGiving;Ó gift; charity; almsgiving; self-sacriÞce; donation; 
generosity.
Self-control
. Dama: Self-control; control of the senses; restraint; taming; 
domination.
SacriÞce
. Yajna: SacriÞce; worship; o
"
ering; sacriÞcial ceremony; a ritual sacriÞce; 
usually the Þre sacriÞce known as agnihotra or havan.
Self-study
. Swadhyaya: Introspective self-study or self-analysis leading to self-
understanding. It can also mean study of scriptures and spiritual texts, especially 
those pertaining to the Self.
Austerity
. Tapasya: Practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline; self-
denial; spiritual force.
Straightforwardness
. Arjava: honesty; rectitude; righteousness; simplicity.

Non-violence
. Ahimsa: Non-injury in thought, word, and deed; non-violence; non-
killing; harmlessness.
Truthfulness
. Satya(m): Truth; the Real; Brahman, or the Absolute; truthfulness; 
honesty.
Renunciation
. Tyaga: Literally: Òabandonment.Ó Renunciation.
Tranquility
. Shanti: Peace; serenity; calm; tranquility; contentment.

Without calumny
. Apaishunam: Absence of calumny, slander, or fault-Þnding.
Uncovetousness
. Aloluptwam: Freedom from desire, lust, or greed.
Gentleness
. Mardava(m): Gentleness; kindness; mildness; tenderness.

Modesty
. Hri: Modesty; bashfulness; absence of pride.
Absence of Þckleness
. Achapalam: Determination; absence of Þckleness; absence of 
change; immovability; Þxedness, Þrmness; steadiness; steadfastness.
Vigor
. Tejas: Vigor; strength; radiance.

Patience
. Kshama: Patience, forgiveness; forbearance.
Fortitude
. Dhriti: Determination; determined; steadfast; constant; attraction; 
sustaining e
"
ort; Þrmness; patience; endurance; fortitude; courage; strength.
Purity
. Shaucha: Purity; cleanliness (of mind and body).
Absence of hatred [malice]
. Adrohas: Without malice; absence of hatred.
Absence of prid
e. Atimanita: Without excessive pride; high honor.
They are the endowment of those born to a divine state
. Fortunately we do not have to 
possess all of these to be yogis, but we should work toward it. This is a valuable 
checklist and can reveal who is a real spiritual aspirant destined to get somewhere. 
No one is beyond it. This I can tell you: Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh (Divine Life 
Society) embodied every one of these virtues to the maximum possible degree. So it 

can be done.
Birthright
288
We bring into this world only what we have accumulated in past lives. This is 
our inheritance, so to speak. God has absolutely nothing to do with it, nor does 
anyone else or any factors whatsoever other than our own previous action. It is our 
destiny as determined by usÐnone other and nothing other.
Hypocrisy, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance are the 
endowment of those born to a demonic state (16:4).
Those who spontaneously exhibit these traits are demonic in nature. We see this 
even in children and it increases as the years go along. The environment of the 
demonic reßect their natureÐthose around them have the same traits as individuals 
and as a society in general.
The divine state is deemed to lead to liberation, the demonic to bondage. 
Do not grieve: you are born for a divine state (16:5).
If we cultivate those qualities on the deva list and root out those qualities on the 
demon list our liberation is assured in time, just as increased bondage is certain for 
those who persist in the ways of the demons. It is interesting to see the modesty of 
Arjuna and his awareness of human frailty, for Krishna sees that he fears lest he be 

of demonic destiny. This is how it always is on this earth: the unworthy feel worthy 
and the worthy feel unworthy. There is a healthy self-doubt and self-mistrust.
More about the demons
There are two types of beings in this world: the divine and the demonic. 
The divine has been described at length. Hear from me of the demonic (16:6).
The Gita is a very positive and spiritually optimistic book, so why are we being 
shown the way of demons? For a very positive reason: so we will detect demonic 
ways in ourselves and counteract them, and so we will discern whether those we 

encounter are divine or demonic. For the wise yogi avoids the demonic and seeks 
out the divine. If he Þnds demonic persons already in his life he eliminates these 
associations. Usually when he meditates and changes his vibration they fade out of 

his life, but if not then he must himself terminate the association as gently and 
diplomatically as possible.
Demonic men know not what to do or refrain from; purity is not found in 
them, nor is good conduct, nor is truth (16:7).
This is so true that it takes the breath away. The demonic not only do not know 
what they should or should not do, they hate the very idea of knowing, because 
then they would have to face their corruption. And they hate anything that would 
somehow make the truth plain to them. They are opponents of truth, purity, and 
right action. And that includes those who contentedly (often smugly) say: ÒI am an 

agnostic.Ó As Jesus told Nicodemus: ÒThis is the condemnation, that light is come 
into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were 
evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest 

his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his 
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in GodÓ (John 3:19-21).
ÒThe world,Ó they say, Òis without truth, without a basis, without God, 
289
produced by mutual union, with lust for its causeÐwhat else?Ó (16:8).
This is certainly a picture of those that today consider themselves the 
intellectual, academic and political elite.
Aparaspara
 is translated Òmutual unionÓ by many translators into English, but it 
literally means Ònot one by the other,Ó or Ònot by a succession.Ó In his translation 
Judge has: Ònot governed by law,Ó and Aurobindo: Òa world of chance.Ó It seems to 
me that the idea is denial of both cause and e
"
ect and the manifestation of the 

universe in an orderly and hierarchical manner according to exact laws. We are all 
familiar with the atheistic-materialistic ideas about the universe being without 
meaning, purpose or even order. It seems to me that Vyasa is indicating that such a 

view of the world without either God or cosmic order is demonic.
Holding this view, these lost souls, small-minded and of cruel deeds, arise 
as the enemies of the world, bent on its destruction (16:9).
This verse has some interesting aspects that need looking into. Two words are 
used to describe these demons:
Nastatmanas
. This word means those whose souls are lost, in the sense of a 
condition of being lost, and those who have lost touch with their souls. It is 
amusing to think how annoyed many yogis get when Fundamentalist Christians ask 
them if they are Òsaved,Ó but here we have the same concept in the Gita! Those 

away from God are lost and those that have been rescued from that state are saved. 
The souls wandering in illusion from life to life are certainly lostÐto themselves. 
When we begin practicing meditation we see how lost we are to ourselves. 

Fortunately, this is only a mental condition that can be corrected by our own e
"
ort. 
For we are always one with God and completely in charge in the highest levels of 
our being.
Alpabuddhayas
. This means those of small intelligenceÐboth those who because 
of lack of evolution are limited in intelligence, and those who willfully choose to 

narrow their intelligence, to make their minds small in scope.
The actions of such people are cruel, greedy, and selÞshÐin other words: 
egocentric. They come into this world as its enemies, because its purpose is 

evolution and eventual liberation, and they loathe anything that uplifts and 

enlightens and will do anything to destroy it. To destroy spiritual knowledge and 
life is to strike at the very root of the world: its divine purpose. All like them are 
enemies of humanity, for true humanity is that which leads to divinity.
Attached to insatiable desires, full of hypocrisy, arrogance and 
intoxication, having accepted false ideas through delusion, they act with foul 

purposes (16:10).
Enslaved not just to the objects of desire, but to desire itself, these addicts of 
degradation are yet Þlled with pride, reveling in falsehood and illusion, bullying 

anyone who dares to not conform to their degraded ways. Believing their own 

madness they rush onward, increasing the pollution of their hearts.
Clinging to boundless cares ending only in death, with gratiÞcation of 
desire as their highest aimÐconvinced that this is allÐ (16:11).
290
These demons live in hell, even on earth, clinging to their fears and anxieties. 
We see this all the time in the way people love conßict and their own misfortunes. 
How many times do we see people that can easily be freed from their miseries, but 
aggressively defend them and repulse any means of alleviation.
Bound by a hundred snares of hope, given over to desire [lust] and anger, 
they seek to gain by unjust means accumulation of wealth to gratify their 

desires (16:12).
Sounds like the ideal modern Òconsumer.Ó
ÒToday this has been acquired by me. This I shall also obtain. This is mine, 
and this gain also shall be mine (16:13).
This is the pursuit of the dream of most people that is really a nightmare.

ÒThat enemy has been slain by me, and I shall slay others, too, for I am the 
Lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, powerful and happy (16:14).
 This is certainly the philosophy of most of the worldÕs governments, and of the 
big business that controls and motivates them.
ÒI am wealthy and high-born,Ó they say, ÒWho else is equal to me? I shall 
sacriÞce, I shall give, I shall rejoice.Ó Thus, they are deluded by ignorance 

(16:15).
If this is not a picture of contemporary mankind, then what is? See how they 
Òget religiousÓ and give thanks to God for his ÒgoodnessÓ? And  worse: they are the 

target of their own delusions.
Led astray by many imagined fancies, caught in a net of delusion, addicted 
to the gratifying of desire, they fall into a foul hell (16:16).
And that hell is their own foul mind.
Self-conceited, stubborn, Þlled with the intoxication of wealth, they 
sacriÞce in name only, for show, not according to the prescribed forms 
(16:17).
Religion is no sign of virtue, as this verse shows. The religion of such persons 
has themselves as its center and its measure of worth. And the worst are those that 

Òmake up my own religion,Ó disregarding the ways and the words of the wise.
Clinging to egotism, power, haughtiness, desire and anger, these malignant 
people hate me in their own and in othersÕ bodies (16:18).
They do not mind parroting the ÒYou Are God And I Am GodÓ cliche, but they 
hate the manifestation of the divine Self in the form of moral purity and spiritual 
discipline as outlined by Patanjali:
1) Ahimsa: non-violence, non-injury, harmlessness

2) Satya: truthfulness, honesty

3) Asteya: non-stealing, honesty, non-misappropriativeness
4) Brahmacharya: sexual continence in thought, word and deed as well as 
control of all the senses
5) Aparigraha: non-possessiveness, non-greed, non-selÞshness, non-
acquisitiveness
6) Shaucha: purity, cleanliness
291
7) Santosha: contentment, peacefulness
8) Tapas: austerity, practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline
9) Swadhyaya: introspective self-study, spiritual study
10) Ishwarapranidhana: o
"
ering of oneÕs life to God
They are masters of The Big Talk, but these ten virtues will be deÞnitely missing 
from their minds and lives. You and I cannot change such people, but we can do one 

good thing:
 avoid them altogether.
These malicious evildoers, cruel, most degraded of men, I hurl perpetually 
into only the wombs of demons here (16:19).
Our environmentÐespecially our familyÐis a reßection of our inner mind, 
otherwise we would have been born elsewhere.
Entering the demonic wombs, and deluded birth after birth, not attaining 
to me, they fall into a progressively lower condition (16:20).
The implication is that such persons sink so low that they become inwardly 
subhuman and and may even begin being born in animal bodies. This is a terrible 

thought, but more than one person has told me of seeing animals that seemed to be 

degraded humans. Yogananda once brought a cat to Brahmacharini Radhalila and 
asked her to care for it, saying that it had been a human being. ÒI wonÕt tell you 
what it did in its previous life to be born as a cat, because if I told you, you would 

hate it and would not take care of it.Ó She believed what he told her, because the cat 
had human eyes, not the eyes of a cat, and whoever it looked at would feel it 
instantly and get the shivers.
The demon doors
As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, the truly worthy often question their 
worth and are very aware of the possibility of their going astray. The demons, on 
the other hand, are completely assured of their worth and goodness. (Bishop Fulton 
Sheen tells in his autobiography of being called to the deathbed of a very old 

woman who said to him: ÒI am the worst woman in New York City.Ó ÒNo you 
arenÕt,Ó he told her. ÒIf you were the worst woman in New York you would claim to 
be the best woman in New York.Ó) So, since KrishnaÕs message will only be heard 

by those of divine tendency, he tells us how to ensure that we will not fall into 
demonic consciousness:
Triple is the gate of this hell, destructive of the Self: desire, anger and 
greed. Therefore one should abandon (renounce) these three (16:21).
Kama, krodha, and lobha are the three Sanskrit words used here.
Kama is desire in any form. It is harmful because it overshadows the intelligence 
and will power and impels us to worthless or negative actions. So whether it is a 
mild force or a volcanic passion, desire must be resisted and eliminated, and lust is 
the greatest destroyer of all. Rather than desires we should have intelligent 

decisions backed up by the enlightened will.
Krodha is anger in all its shades of intensity. Anger is really frustrated egotism. 
As Krishna explains: ÒFor a man dwelling on the objects of the senses, attachment 
292
to them is born; from attachment desire is born; and from [thwarted] desire anger 
is born. From anger arises delusion; from delusion, loss of memory; from loss of 
memory, destruction of intelligence [buddhi]: from destruction of intelligence one 
is lostÓ (2:62-63).
Lobha is greed, which includes envy and covetousness. Of the three it is the 
most obviously egotistical. It is both ego-worship and a demand that others 

worship our ego, too. Any force of ÒI wantÓ is greed.
The truth is, these three doors to hell of the mind and body are mixed together. 
When you have one you are sure to have the other two, as time will prove. This 

being so, Krishna assures us that:
A man who is liberated from these three gates to darkness does what is 
best for him, and thus goes to the Highest Goal (16:22).
This is one of the most important teachings of the Gita. 
Tamodvarais
 can mean 
either Ògates to darknessÓ or Ògates to tamas.Ó In this instance I think it does mean 
the Þrst, but it is instructive to realize that desire, anger, and greed, although 
rajasic, if indulged in will lead us down into tamas.
He who casts aside the injunctions of the scriptures, following the impulse 
of desire, attains neither perfection nor happiness, nor the Supreme Goal 

(16:23).
The need to follow the path outlined by the sages can hardly be exaggerated. 
Otherwise we follow our ego-whims, claiming to be intuitive and following our 

inner wisdom. Only those in the blinding grip of ego think that they can ignore the 

counsels of the enlightened and manage. But in most instances they really do not 
plan to manage. Rather, they plan to fall and then feel justiÞed in abandoning any 
semblance of spiritual life altogether: ÒI used to be a yogi;Ó ÒI used to be a 

vegetarian;Ó ÒI used to be celibate;Ó ÒI used to be religious;Ó and worst of all: ÒI used 
to be a monk (or nun).Ó As Yogananda often said: ÒPeople are so skilled in their 
ignorance.Ó
Therefore the standards of the scriptures should be your guide in 
determining what should be done and what should not be done. Knowing 

what the scriptural injunctions prescribe, you should perform action here in 

this world (16:24).
This is the only sensible conclusion, one that will lead all who heed it to Eternal 
Wisdom.
293
Faith and the Three Gunas
We have no way of knowing if Vyasa divided the Gita into chapters and verses. It 
is likely he did not, because the demarcation between the chapters is not always 
detectable, as is the case in this chapter. The Þrst verse is a logical continuation of 
the last two verses of chapter sixteen. Without them as context, it lacks logic and 

relevance to some degree. So here they are. Krishna says:
ÒHe who casts aside the injunctions of the scriptures, following the impulse of 
desire, attains neither perfection nor happiness, nor the Supreme Goal. Therefore 

the standards of the scriptures should be your guide in determining what should be 
done and what should not be done. Knowing what the scriptural injunctions 
prescribe, you should perform action here in this worldÓ (16:23-24).
SacriÞce and faith
Now we are ready to begin chapter seventeen. In response to the two verses just 
cited:
Arjuna said: Those who cast aside the prescriptions of the scriptures, 
doing sacriÞce with faith, what is their condition: sattwa, rajas or tamas? 
(17:1).
Two words here need deÞning: Yajna and Shraddha. In this chapter yajna means 
not just ritualistic o
"
ering (sacriÞce) but any kind of worship or spiritual action. 

Shraddha always means faith, but in the sense of an intuition-based conviction, not 
just a mere unquestioning belief. So Arjuna is presenting us with the picture of a 
person who believes wholeheartedly in the e
!
cacy of spiritual action or practice, 

but who disregards the principles of spiritual tradition as set forth in the scriptures 
or teachings of the enlightened ones. Such a one simply goes ahead and does what 
he thinks is the best way to approach spiritual life, picking and choosing what he 

does and how he does it. This is not what Krishna has been saying to do. So Arjuna 
wants to know if faith, or belief that the actions will produce the desired e
"
ect, will 
compensate for the disregard of the shastras (scriptures). In other words, he is 

thinking of the type of person that in this century claims to be Òspiritual, not 
religious.Ó Can that really work, Arjuna wants to know. What is the guna (quality) 
of such faith?
Inner quality
Krishna has already said that: ÒOne acts according to oneÕs own prakritiÐeven 
the wise man does soÓ (3:33). He expands on that in this connotation:
The Holy Lord said: Threefold is the embodied onesÕ faith inherent within 
their nature: the sattwic, the rajasic and the tamasic. So hear of this (17:2).
So faith does not determine the quality of the personÐthe personÕs interior 
character (swabhava) determines the type of faith he has. That may seem obvious, 
294
but for some reason in the West we continually reverse cause and e
"
ect, so I want 
to make a point of it.
Krishna has more to say about this:

The faith of each one is according to his nature. A man consists of his 
faithÐhe is what his faith is (17:3).
Shraddhamayo Õyam purusho
Ða person is made/formed of faith. 
Yo yacchraddhah sa 
eva sah
Ðwhat his faith is: he is. And if he has no faith? He is nothing. So we can 

determine the basic character of a person by his faith. Krishna will now tell us how.
The worshipped
The sattwic worship the gods; the rajasic worship yakshas and rakshasas; 
the others, the tamasic men, worship the spirits of the departed and hosts of 
nature spirits 
[bhutas]
 (17:4).
Several types of beings are mentioned here and should be deÞned. We will rely 
on our old friend, 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
.
Devas
 are Òshining ones;Ó in the evolutionary hierarchy they are semi-divine or 
celestial beings with great powers, and therefore Ògods.Ó Sometimes they are called 
demi-gods. Most devas are the demigods presiding over various powers of material 
and psychic nature.
Yakshas
 are of two kinds: semidivine beings whose king is Kubera, the lord of 
wealth; or a kind of ghost, goblin, or demon. The rajasic worship the Þrst kind to 

gain material advantage, and worship the second kind to get them to harm those 

standing in their way of material gain.
Rakshas
 are also of two kinds: semidivine, benevolent beings, or cannibal 
demons or goblins, enemies of the gods. The rajasic worship them for the same 

reasons as they worship the yakshas.
Pretas
 are ghostsÐspirits of the dead. Sometimes these are just wandering 
earthbound ÒtrampÓ souls, but they may be famous people or oneÕs own ancestors.
Bhutas
 are of two types: some are subhuman nature spirits or Òelementals,Ó but 
some are earthbound human spirits: ghosts. Bhutas may be either positive or 

negative.
Ganas
 are usually part of groups of spirits that wander togetherÐmostly of 
various types. The term is also used as a kind of ÒmiscellaneousÓ category for 

entities that have not otherwise been identiÞed. A gana may be benevolent or 

malevolent, but is usually disorderly, chaotic, and wild in the sense of untamed or 
unruly, and potentially dangerous (hazardous). A ganaÕs appearance is usually 
deformed, repulsive, or frightening.
Although Krishna speaks of ÒworshipÓ in connection with these beings, it means 
any kind of intentional supernatural involvement or contact. This should be kept in 

mind.
It is not enough to just move into the world of the invisible; we must know 
where we are going to end up in that world. And we will certainly end up in the 

worlds of the kind of beings we habitually have contact and interchange with. 
295
Inconceivably vast as the physical universe is, the astral world is inconceivably 
larger than the physical plane. Not all beings in the astral realms can be contacted 
by human beings, but innumerable ones of numberless classiÞcations or levels of 
evolution can beÐoften to the detriment or destruction of the human. Yet, since 

each one of us acts according to his dominant nature, so it will be in our 
supernatural involvement.
The sattwic
Since their very nature orients them toward higher realms of consciousness and 
impels them to evolve upward into and even beyond those realms, Krishna tells us 
that the sattwic worship the devas, whose nature is light. From deva we get the 
word Òdivine.Ó In its highest sense it means God the Absolute. In a secondary sense 
it means all who consciously dwell in and reßect the divine light as Òpartakers of 

the divine natureÓ (II Peter 1:4). These include the various forms of God that are 
manifestations of the inÞnite divine attributes as well as the beings known as gods 
who wield divine powers for the assistance of those beneath them on the 

evolutionary ladder. Such beings include angels, saints, departed masters, and a 
host of other holy helpers. Since their entire will and consciousness is focused on 
God, interchange with them will elevate our consciousness toward the Divine as 

well. Communion with them will strengthen our aspirations toward God-
realization.
The rajasic
The rajasic are quite di
"
erent. Hungering for material things (including power) 
which they regard as the only source of happiness, pleasure, or fulÞllment, they 
resort to gods and spirits that are ego- and greed-oriented like themselves. Such 
gods demand o
"
erings of various kinds and, though they conceal this fact from 
their devotees, at the time of death those who worship or tra
!
c with them will be 

taken into their worlds and made their servant-slaves. Some will be quickly shunted 
back to earthly rebirth to again become their devotees and supply them with what 
they want, but they can be kept imprisoned in those worlds for ages, as well. The 

awful thing about this is that most of the time these gods really have little power, 
and it is the o
"
ering of their worshippers that gives them their power. So in reality 
it is the gods that are dependent on the worshippers, not the other way round, 

however it may seem.
The yakshas and rakshas are divided into higher and lower types, but all are in 
bondage to ignorance and rebirth in some form, and contact with them can never 

really work to the ultimate good of the human who does so. The higher yakshas and 
rakshas are much more evolved than humans and can do things for them on a 
mundane level. They have good will, but still look upon humans as servants and 

demand o
"
erings of some kind. They are never altruistic, and do not consider that 
they should be. They look upon themselves as merchants or suppliers of services. 
They can be angered and refuse to give the requested help, and often (very often) 
296
wreak vengeance on those who anger them or refuse them something. They can 
make life miserable or even terminate itÐall according to the karma incurred by 
their petitioners. And this is how it is with the ÒpositiveÓ ones!
Some yakshas and rakshas are degraded, demonic beings, avid for worship, gifts, 
and power, lying and deceitful, always scheming to injure and deceive those who 

approach them, though for a while they seem benevolent in order to ensnare their 
devotees. Their only intention is to delude and plunder. Filled with pride they 

despise those that approach them and from the initial contact intend to lie and loot 
them. These, too, will harm and destroy those that o
"
end them. Both these types, 
higher and lower, are the gods worshipped by greedy, egoic religionists of all typesÐ

some quite openly deal with such beings while others do so in a secret or deceitful 
form. And of course these entities continually introduce themselves as gods, saints, 
and great masters. And frankly, a large percentage of ÒgurusÓ are very like yakshas 

and rakshas.
The tamasic
The tamasic naturally gravitate to the pretas and bhutas. The pretas are the 
spirits of the dead. Ancestor worshippers and spiritualists openly seek out these 
spirits. Besides the pretas are the bhutas that range from earthbound ghosts to 

elementals and subhuman nature spirits. Some of these are deluded, evil, or just 
plain stupid. Some of them, being completely outside the stream of human 
evolution, do not really know what is going on, but play with humans the way tame 

animals would. Nothing good can come of any of this.
Many of these spirits demand o
"
erings of all sorts and they have a very real 
power to do harm, and a predisposition to do so. Some even kill human beings, not 

realizing that they are doing so. Air elementals often urge people to jump out into 
the air, thinking they will ßy with them. Water elementals urge swimmers to keep 
swimming further and further from shore until they become exhausted and drownÐ

though that is not the elementalsÕ intention. Fire elementals urge peopleÐand 
especially childrenÐto play with Þre in hopes of a conßagration, though destruction 
is not their purpose. Earth elementals urge people to continually go underground 

and often try to keep them there by cave-ins and other mishaps. Again, they have 
no concept of death, so the elementals have no malicious intent. They just want to 
be friends.
There is no use warning the rajasic and tamasic away from their playmates. It is 
their nature to interact with them. Krishna is just giving us this information so if 

we have any pockets of rajas or tamas lingering in us we will be warned and not 

indulge them. Mostly he is wanting to show us how we can determine the guna of a 
person or a religion by scrutinizing their supernatural contact. What about those 
that have no supernatural contact of any kind? We should consider them non-

existent, spiritually speaking.
Demonic asceticism and discipline
297
As just pointed out, negative and foolish spirits demand many kinds of sacriÞce, 
some of them being insane forms of asceticism that destroy body, mind, and soul. 
Hating their dupes, and knowing that the body is meant to be an instrument of 
enlightenment, they urge them to harm this invaluable gift of God. Besides that, 

many demonic people are Þlled with self-loathing and express it through destructive 
asceticism. Finally, there are those of whom Krishna has said: ÒThese malignant 
people hate me in their own and in othersÕ bodiesÓ (16:18).
It is with this in mind that Krishna continues:
Those who practice extreme austerities not ordained by the scriptures, 
accompanied by hypocrisy and egotism along with the force of desire and 
passion, senselessly torturing in the body the entire aggregates of the 
elements, and me within the body, know them to be of demonic resolves 
(17:5-6).
In every religion we Þnd this in some form, and almost always it is praised and 
considered a proof of sanctity, although it is actually evidence of delusion and 

psychosis. This is rampant in India, so much so that I do not even know where to 

begin or end in recounting it. Since I hope none of you will develop mental illness 
and become deluded yogis of this type, I will not bother you with further 
exposition.
But since part of the next chapter of the Gita deals with food, I will name some 
of the foolish and harmful dietary ideas enjoined by contemporary Indian yogis who 

should know better, especially in the climatic conditions of India.
Prohibition of salt
. Salt is essential to correct brain function. Lack of salt produces 
mental and physical debility, which is why sensible employers supply salt tablets to 

workers who perspire a great deal while at their job. One hellish summer I was in 

Benares and feeling terrible, hardly able to think. I had gone to visit the publishers 
of the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, whose main o
!
ce was in a sweltering attic. As 
I sat there feeling like I could die and afraid I was going to pass out, I came to the 

conclusion that I should leave my fellow travelers in India and return to America 
and check into a hospital for tests. I really felt that bad. Mercifully there popped 
into my mind the matter of salt tablets used by workers during extremely hot 

weather or working conditions. Upon leaving there, I went directly to a drugstore 
and bought some. That night before sleeping I took several, and awoke in the 
morning feeling completely well and mentally alert. So from then on I kept salt 

tablets with me when traveling in India.
Nothing can justify the prohibition of salt except in special medical cases such 
as high blood pressure, and then it should be made by a qualiÞed medical 

practitioner. Yet this moronic dictum is to be found in many books on yoga.
Prohibition of chillies
. Anywhere in the world, but particularly in a tropical climate 
like that of India, intestinal parasites are an inevitable problem. And few things are 

more helpful in eliminating them than chili peppers, especially fresh green ones. 
Chillies contain a natural form of quinine that is very cleansing for the digestive 
tract and helps in warding o
"
 malaria, another tropical danger. To tell yogis to never 
298
eat chillies in any form is irresponsible as well as ignorant.
Prohibition of garlic
. Equally nonsensical and irresponsible is the prohibition of 
garlic. Garlic is the best antibiotic nature has to o
"
er. It cures many ills and destroys 
intestinal parasites and cleanses the intestines. Large amounts of garlic can be of 

supreme help at the onset of colds, ßu, and other troubles. It is also very beneÞcial 
in high blood pressure and insomnia.
Prohibition of onions
. Onions purify the blood and tone up the digestive tract. 
They also enable a person to endure hot weather (raw onions are especially good for 

this). They are beneÞcial in every climate, but in India they are especially so. Not 
only did Sri Ramana Maharshi consider prohibition of onions and garlic silly, he 

actually wrote a satirical song about his motherÕs exagerrated aversion to even 
touching them. Since one of his disciples, Annamalai Swami, was in charge of 
building in the blistering hot weather, he had him eat so much onions that he 

reeked of onion and consequently became known in the ashram as ÒOnion Swami.Ó
Prohibition of all spices or ßavorings
. This is utterly silly. The spices and other 
ßavorings used in traditional Indian cooking have genuine health beneÞts. For 

example, Sri Anandamayi Ma formulated a recipe her devotees called ÒAnandamayi 
Kitchuri.Ó For ßavoring it contained turmeric, ginger, anise seed, fenugreek seed, 
cumin seed, plenty of chilis and salt. This was eaten by those who practiced intense 

sadhana under her direction. Each of those ingredients has a medicinal value, and 
Ma said that if this was eaten daily as the major item in the diet, they would not 
become ill. I have eaten some of the food that Ma herself ate daily, and it was hot! 

Those who had eaten MaÕs cooking told me the same. Sri Ramakrishna used to tell 
those who were cooking for him: ÒPut in enough spices to make a pig squeal!Ó
There are those in India that call their food prohibitions Òeating sattwic,Ó but 
Krishna will say in just a few verses that tamasic people like and recommend 

tasteless food. The idea that the yogiÕs life is to be bland and boring does not come 
from real yogis. And that applies to food, as well. Krishna will also point out that 

sattwic people like ßavorful food. As one famous yogi told me: ÒBoring people like 
boring food and interesting people like interesting food.Ó
299
Food and the Three Gunas
The food also liked by each one is threefold, as is sacriÞce, tapasya, and 
almsgiving. Hear the distinction of them (17:7).
It is interesting that these three things are major indicators of the dominant 
guna of an individual.
Sattwic food
Foods increasing life, purity, strength, health, happiness, cheerfulness, 
ßavorful, smooth, Þrm and substantial are liked by the sattwic (17:8).
Since we are seeking to become increasingly sattwic, we should look at each 
point of this verse so we can improve our diet and increase our sattwa, 
remembering that food becomes mind according to the Chandogya Upanishad. 
ÒFood when eaten becomes threefold, its coarsest portion becomes the faeces; its 
middle (portion) ßesh, and its subtlest (portion) mindÉ Thus, my dear, mind 

consists of foodÓ (6.5.1, 4). ÒOf the curd, my dear, when churned, that which is 
subtle moves upwards, it becomes butter. In the same manner, my dear, of the food 
that is eaten, that which is subtle moves upwards, it becomes mind. Thus, my dear, 

mind consists of foodÓ (6.6.1,2, 5).
Ayus
Ðfood that actually increases the span of life. In other words, truly healthy 
food that protects the body and fosters it. The problem is that everybody has their 

own idea about what kind of food is healthy. I recommend that you read Dr. Neal 
BarnardÕs books on diet, starting with 
Food For Life
. Also T. Colin CampbellÕs 
The 
China Study
. But the absolute best books on diet and health are 
How Not To Die
 and 
How Not To Diet,
 by Dr. Michael GregerMost people are slowly killing themselves 

with wrong diet. If they do not shorten their life, they make sure that they are sick 
for years at the end of their life. Ayus also means what increases life force.
Sattwa
Ðfood that increases the quality of sattwa, which also implies food that 
promotes virtue, both in the sense of strength and in the sense of goodness. It is 

food that lightens and promotes health of body and mind, food that is actually 

spiritual in its e
"
ect. This is purely vegan food, free of both animal and chemical 
elements.
Bala
Ðfood that imparts strength to the body and mind.
Arogya
Ðfood that strengthens the immune system so the body can resist or rid 
itself of disease.
Sukha
Ðfood which is easy for the body to digest and which produces ease and 
comfort in the body.
Priti
Ðfood that truly satisÞes the body nutritionally, and therefore the mind. It 
need not be eaten like medicine. In fact, priti is that which gives actual pleasure in 

the eating.
Rasyas
Ðfood which has abundant good ßavor, that has plenty of taste.
300
Snigdhas
Ðfood which contains su
!
cient oil, which is smooth and pleasant to eat.
Sthiras
Ðfood which is substantial.
Hridyas
Ðfood which is hearty, satisfying and pleasant-feeling in the stomach.
This is a valuable checklist to help us eat truly sattwic food.
Rajasic food
Foods that are pungent, sour, salty, excessively hot, harsh, astringent and 
burning, producing pain, grief, and disease are liked by the rajasic (17:9).
Kata
Ðfood that is extremely acrid, pungent, or sharpÐthat is virtually caustic to 
the mouth.
Amla
Ðfood that is very acidic, sour, or vinegary.
Lavana
Ðfood that is very salty or briny (containing pickle-type ßuid). This is hard 
on the kidneys and raises the blood pressure.
Atyushna
Ðfood that is excessively hot. The problem here is deciding what is 
excessive, for the more people eat hot food the more tolerance they develop, until 
what will be painfully burning hot to others will be mild to their taste. I knew a 

man who would sit and eat jalapeŒo peppers whole like a snack. When I asked if 
they were hot, he said No. So I bit into one. Volcano!
Tikshna
Ðfood that is harsh, Þery, and acid, especially in the stomach.
Raksha
Ðfood that is astringent, and also rough and dry, the kind of things that 
cut the roof of your mouth or even your esophagus as it goes down.
Vidahinas
Ðfood that is burning and scorching.
The results
This kind of food is productive of:

Duhkha
Ðpain and discomfort or stress.
Shoka
Ðmisery: that regret so many feel and which makes anti-acid manufacturers 
rich, and which contributes to ulcers.
Amaya
Ðsickness in the sense of malfunction and disease produced by the 
harming it does to the body.
Next to its harmful e
"
ects, the more unfortunate aspect of this kind of food is 
its addicting nature. So rajasic food is the most di
!
cult kind to give up.
Tamasic food
That which is stale, tasteless, putrid, leftover to the next day, uchchishta 
[the remnants of food eaten by others; actual leavings from someoneÕs plate] 
and impure, is the food the tamasic like (17:10).
Yatayamam
Ðfood that is leftover, stale, and even spoiled. A lot of people eat this 
kind of food just from laziness or lack of initiativeÐboth traits of tamas. Most chain 

restaurant food is unÞt for human consumption, what to say about the ÒdeliÓ food 

from big grocery stores. No one knows how old that is. Fast food chains pack their 
foodÐespecially meatÐin bags of formaldehyde and other horrors. Some people will 
cook a large amount of food and then eat it for a week or more. I have known 
301
people that would scrape o
"
 the mold and eat away. Much canned food is another 
o
"
ense to humanity. The willingness to eat stale foodÐand sometimes the inability 
to tell it is staleÐis more psychological than physical, and we must not let 
misapplied thrift get us into the habit of eating this devitalized food. Since there 

was no refrigeration in ancient India, no food was considered Þt to eat if it sat 
overnight. However, now that we can refrigerate and even freeze food, the eating of 
leftovers is not always detrimental.
Gatarasam
Ðfood that is tasteless, devoid of ßavor. This description applies to a lot 
of ÒsattwicÓ food cooked by those that think they are spiritual or even yogis. It is 

ßavorless and insubstantial, and often has a displeasing color and texture. And on 

top of it all they give people a little dab, commenting: ÒThis is really pretty rich [or 
heavy] and you mustnÕt eat too much.Ó Some chance! The last time I had to eat in 
the home of such dedicated, grim and rote people, the amount served for eight 

people would only have su
!
ced for three normal human beings. Their tasteless and 
insu
!
cient food reßected their philosophy and their minds.
Puti
Ðfood that is putrid, stinking, and fetid. How many times have you seen 
restaurant signs or ads boasting that they serve aged steaks? It is the custom of 

ÒgourmetsÓ to ÒhangÓ birds and let them decay a bit before cooking them. I read of 
one restaurant that would ÒhangÓ grouse until they bred maggots, which they 

would wash o
"
 before cooking. One evening a group of customers called for the 
chef and rhapsodized over the delicious Òstu
!
ngÓ that had been in the grouse. At 
Þrst the chef was bewildered, and then realized that the maggots had not been 

removed, but had been baked in the grouse! This is a clear example of how tamasic 
food perverts the palate.
Meat itself is rotting ßesh. And what of the moldy and ÒstinkyÓ cheese so 
beloved to many? Think of the awful smell Þsh and seafood emit when being 

cooked, what to say of the stench in oriental markets that stock them dried? Delight 
in such things is distinctly abnormal. Do I need to mention such ghastly things as 

Òhundred year oldÓ eggs and suchlike?
Uchchistam
Ðfood that has been eaten on by another person. This is a favorite of 
many. They grab o
"
 the plates of others, plop things from their plates on othersÕ 

plates, say: ÒGive me a taste of thatÓ and take a bite o
"
 whatever someone has been 
eating (often a body part of an animal). Eating anotherÕs spit! In modern times 
when we know about germs and communicable diseases, it makes no di
"
erence to 

them. ÒGive me a sip of thatÉ tear o
"
 a hunk of that for meÉ let me have a little 
bite of yourÉ.Ó This is the way they feed. It is also a way they take the life energies 
of others and give to them their unhealthy or diseased energies.
Drink
The description of tamasic food applies to drink, as well, the rajasic and tamasic 
loving fermented, alcoholic liquids, and being addicted to every form of poisonous 
soft drink.
302
A missing element
At the time of Krishna reÞned sugar in any form was unknown, so it is not on 
the list. It may be disguised as rajasic in elaborate and ingenious forms of sweet 
things, but its destructive nature makes it tamasic, though there is a good case for 

arguing that it should not even be listed as food, but poison.
Even more
These principles can be applied to every aspect of our life, not just to food. 
Society, religion, personalities, modes of lifeÐjust about everything can be classiÞed 
with the traits of the food Krishna has described. We really 
are
 what we 
eat
, and 
eat
 
what we 
are
, even metaphysically speaking.
303
Religion and the Three Gunas
Whenever the word ÒsacriÞceÓ is used in the Gita it covers the entire range of 
spiritual practice and spiritual life in general. In the following verses ritualistic 
worshipÐand no doubt the Þre sacriÞceÐis certainly referred to, but it applies in the 
wider sense, as well.
Sattwa
SacriÞce which is o
"
ered, observing the scriptures, by those who do not 
desire the fruits, concentrating the mind only on the thought: ÒThis is to be 
o
"
ered;Ó that is sattwic (17:11).
Sattwa alone leads to liberation, so it is wise to order our spiritual life according 
to its traits as listed here.
First, we are told that sattwic spiritual life is lived according to the principles of 
the scriptures. This includes the teachings and counsels of those who have attained 
higher consciousness. It is necessary for us who have not traveled the path to 
consider the advice of those who have successfully traversed it. We need not be 
slavish or idolatrous about any scripture or teaching, but we need to seriously 

consider the words of those who have been inspired from within to lead humanity 
toward higher life. Mary Baker Eddy very aptly called such persons Way-Showers. 
This implies a very practical attitude toward them: they are not gods or absolute 

authorities, but they show the way to succeed in spiritual life. They are not 
interested in imparting a philosophy, but in showing us how to attain the highest 
consciousness.
Just as a person experienced and skilled in something can teach others, so do 
they. It is always a clear matter of cause and e
"
ect. It either works or it does not. 

Belief, obedience, or ÒsurrenderÓ have absolutely nothing to do with it. At all times 

it is according to the judgment of the seeker. Sometimes we have to follow a path to 
Þnd out for ourself if it works. And nothing is sadder than those who spend years 
getting nowhere, yet clinging to a worthless discipline because they have committed 

themselves to it or, even worse, have entered into some pathological personal 
compact (including a supposed guru-disciple relationship) that enslaves them and 
blinds them to the evidently valueless character of that path or association. Most 

unfortunate of all are those who are bound and blinded by ÒloveÓ for the teacher or 
group that is stagnating and devastating their lives and hearts. ÒLoyaltyÓ and 
ÒattunementÓ is the slave-collar about their neck.
Next we are told that spiritual life is not engaged in for personal gain in the 
external sense, but rather as an o
"
ering to the Divine both within and without. 

Such a way of life is not engaged in for any other motive than being in harmony 

with the cosmic order the ancient sages of India called 
Ritam
. Truly spiritual people 
live a spiritual life because it is according to their true nature. They are expressing 
304
their inmost being. They are not trying to become something, but are moving out of 
darkness into the light so they can know what they really are: to behold their 
eternal Self, that which Buddhists call the Original Nature. Real spiritual life is not 
loading ourselves with an array of spiritual paraphernalia, but divesting ourselves of 

all that is not us.
Rajas
But sacriÞce which is o
"
ered with a view for the fruit and for the purpose 
of ostentation, know that to be rajasic (17:12).
This pretty well describes nearly all the religious or spiritual life of human 
beings. Those who are interested in the good will or admiration of man and God, 
and hope to receive whatever they desire in return for their religiosity, are in the 
grip of the rajasic ego. Ultimately it leads nowhere but back to more rebirth and 

confusion.
Tamas
SacriÞce devoid of faith, disregarding the scriptures, with no food o
"
ered, 
without mantras, without gift or fee is declared to be tamasic (17:13).
Sometimes we have to pay attention to ignorance to Þgure out the ways of 
wisdom. And that is the case here regarding tamasic religion. This is a very full 
picture of deluded and confused Òspirituality,Ó and we need to look at it so we can 
avoid it.
SacriÞce devoid of faith
. The Þrst quality of tamasic religion listed is 
shraddhavirahitam
Ðdevoid of faith or having abandoned faith. To really understand 

this, we must remember that as mentioned before shraddha is not mere intellectual 

belief, but an interior, intuitive conviction that arises as an enlivening of the inner 
intelligence of an individual. In other words, a religion of shraddha is a religion that 
is spiritually alive, and therefore inwardly perceptive. In the sixth chapter of the 

Gita we have this description of one who has this divine shraddha: ÒThe yogiÉ 
having become one with Brahman,É easily touching Brahman,É I am not lost to 
him, and he is not lost to meÓ (6:27-28, 30). This is the religion we should seek, 

realizing that it can be hinted at outwardly, but can only be achieved inwardly. As 
Jesus said (Luke 17:21): ÒThe kingdom of God is within youÓÐactually 
is
 you.
Contrary to the scriptures
. The word used here is very interesting: 
vidhihinam
Ðwhich 
means both Òlacking scripturesÓ and Òdiscarding scriptures.Ó Krishna is implying 

here that scriptures are necessary for real spiritual life. However, in the East any 
book that contains wisdom is considered a scripture, even if it was written this 

morning. So Krishna is speaking of the wisdom of enlightened teachers that have 
been put into words and set down for our help in pursuing spiritual life.
He is also referring to a spiritual traditionÐnot narrow and sectarian, but a 
tradition, nonetheless. In the West we tend wisely to shy away from tradition 

because of the deadly ignorance in the West of those who boast of being traditional. 
But in the East tradition is always subject to intelligent scrutiny and is never a 
305
matter of Òthe book says it, so I believe it.Ó Most important, authentic spiritual 
tradition is understood to be veriÞable by each seeker for himself. In the West many 
are satisÞed with intellectual jugglery and argumentation, but in the East it is 
practical experience that is sought. Whenever I quote a scripture in my writings I 

certainly think of it as lending authority to what I have to say, but I also use 
quotations simply because the scriptures say it so much better than I can.
Tamasic religion is that which has no authentic scripture(s), no viable 
tradition(s). It may either be the shallow and ßimsy Òmake up my ownÓ whimsical 

kind, or a religion burdened with fantasy and lies claiming to be GodÕs latest 
revelation to the world. Either way, its characteristic is the darkness, confusion, and 

delusion of tamas.
On the other hand, some tamasic religion may have a great deal of scriptures in 
which true wisdom is to be found, but the leaders and adherents prefer to ignore 

the wisdom and subvert the teaching to suit their own fancy. So while adulating the 
scriptures they really cast them aside. Consider the way nearly every religion 
manages to condone spiritually poisonous behavior and thought, wresting the 

scriptures to not only approve, but often to advocate them. Almost no religion is 
free from this, as anyone with open-eyed experience and observation will know. 
Often the divine light of holy wisdom is completely covered by the evil and untruth 

of a religionÕs popular form.
Finally, 
vidhihinam
 can also simply mean Òwithout knowledge (vidya)Ó or 
Òdiscarding (ignoring) knowledge.Ó In other words, ignorant and ine
"
ectual religion 

that boasts of its ÒfaithÓ since it has no substance or reality. Today we Þnd many 
religious currents in the world that were born in ignorance, and went on from there 
to greater ignorance. There are also religions that started out with authentic 

spiritual knowledge, with true spiritual revelation, but turned away from it in order 
to gain power and wealth. This is especially the case with state religions, or those 
that used to be state religions. Having remodeled their spiritual structure to suit 

their governing patrons, they lost their original value and often the patronage, as 
well. Christianity is the latest and most blatant example of this.
With no food o
!
ered
. 
Asrishtannam
 means food that is either not o
"
ered, or is not 
shared out after the o
"
ering. This is an important part in Eastern religion of 

whatever kind. There is always o
"
ering of food which is then distributed to those 
presentÐusually in the form of an abundant feast. But the selÞsh refuse to do so, 

and their religion becomes one of taking but not giving. This is the mark of any 
cultÐold or new.
Without mantras
. First, there is the mantra known as the 
sankalpa
 which is recited 
at the beginning of any ritual, stating its purpose and dedication. Its absence would 

indicate religion that is vague, even purposeless, performed in a rote way simply for 
the doing of it, or religion whose real purpose is not at all grasped, and is therefore 

meaningless. But 
mantrahinam
 is like 
vidhihinam
; it has the dual meaning of Òwithout 
mantraÓ or Òdisregarding mantra.Ó This indicates religion that is without order or 

legitimacy, and especially religion that is without power, for power (e
"
ectiveness) is 
306
the fundamental characteristic of mantra. So we are looking at a religion that never 
had any spiritual power, or has come to discard and even deny that power. It can 
also be applied to the adherents of a religion that does have power and knowledge, 
but regarding which they are either ignorant or indi
"
erent.
Without gift [given to the o
"
ciants]
. 
Adakshinam
 simply means Òwithout feeÓ or 
voluntary o
"
ering. This means a religion in which the members engage in take-but-

not-give policy, the obverse side of the type where the religion itself only demands 

and takes. Such religion is proud of the fact that it expects nothing of its adherents, 
and they are proud of that, too. ÒOur religion is democratic,Ó they boast. ÒYou donÕt 
need to do anything you donÕt want to.Ó They confuse democracy with anarchy. It is 

certainly true that in worthy religion the members are not coerced or cajoled in any 
way. But people that want to avoid all involvement, commitment, or investment of 
time and thought are unworthy of such a religion and will never beneÞt from it 

until they change their outlook.
Such religion often denies the fact of priesthood or hierarchical realities, 
refusing to recognize that some people may be more spiritually skilled or 

knowledgeable than others. Such religion revels in a kind of egalitarianism that 
suppresses anything but lock-step standardization and mediocrity. ÒThe priesthood 
of all believersÓ sounds nice, but it often masks ine
"
ectiveness and repression.
Adakshinam
 also indicates a kind of selÞsh materialism that hates expenditure of 
time, e
"
ort, or even money on religion. My great-aunt Lou Maxey not only never 

put anything in the collection plate, she would grimly shake her head No whenever 

it came by her! But she was one of the Þrst to head to the back of the church to get 
a free copy of the weekly church magazine. Deadbeat religion is nothing new.
At the opposite pole are the saintsÐthat is why they 
are
 saints. As Mirabai, the 
great poet/musician saint of India wrote: ÒI have sold everything in the marketplace 

of this world and bought my Khanaia (Krishna). Some laugh at me and say the price 
was too great, and some say that the price was too small. But Mira only knows that 

it was everything she had.Ó
Tamasic religion really has no genuine perception at allÐit is only obscurity and 
confusion. However, there are degrees of tamas (as with the other gunas, as well), 

and we can encounter people who have no faith in their religion because they dimly 
intuit that it is nonsense. But, being tamasicÐone quality of which is inertiaÐthey 
stay with it and go through the motions although knowing it means nothing. Here, 

too, we Þnd religions that once had a mystical aspect, but jettisoned it for material 
gain or from spiritual blindness resulting from impurity and dullness of heart. 
There are individuals that are the same. For whatever reason, they blind themselves 

to the insights they once had and become wanderers in the fog along with so many 
others. I have seen people do this for various reasons, but the result was always the 
same: inner death. And I have never seen one regain what they willfully cast aside. 

Rebirth alone will restore it to them, and after how long a struggle?
The whole subject of tamasic religion is certainly gloomy, but spiritual adults 
know they have to acknowledge a lot of facts that are not pretty or pleasant, just as 
307
in material life unpleasant realities must be faced. The up side of the whole thing is 
that having given careful consideration to the matter we can avoid slipping into its 
ways and ourselves losing our inner vision.
The wise traveller knows both the right and the wrong roads.
308
Tapasya and the Three Gunas
Tapasya is practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline. Literally it means 
the generation of heat or energy, referring to spiritual practice and its e
"
ect, 
especially the roasting of karmic seeds, the burning up of karma. It also refers to the 
heat necessary for the hatching of an egg. Without tapasya there is no signiÞcant 

spiritual progress. So Krishna tells us of three levels of tapasya as well as its 
characterization according to the dominant guna of the persons engaging in tapasya.
Tapasya of the body
Reverence for the gods, the twice-born 
[dwijas]
, teachers and the wise; 
purity, straightforwardness, brahmacharya and non-injury: these are called 
tapasya of the bodyy (17:14).
Reverence (pujanam) is internal, so why does it come Þrst in the list of physical 
tapasya? Because Krishna is not thinking of mere philosophizing or abstractionÐ

empty words. He is thinking of action, of kriya, which creates positive karma in the 
form of puriÞcation and enlightenment. Puja is the word usually translated worship, 
and some translators use it rather than reverence. Worship in KrishnaÕs view is not 

mere verbal praise or gloriÞcation, but a living out of the interior attitude of 
reverence. As Jesus once asked: ÒWhy call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things 
which I say?Ó (Luke 6:46) So to reverence a spiritual authority is not to ßatter, 

grovel, and promote them or shower them with money and gifts. Rather, it is 
faithfully and seriously applying their teachings. Krishna speaks of four kinds who 
deserve our reverence: gods, twice-born, teachers, and wise men.
Devas are godsÐnot the Supreme God, but highly evolved beings who can a
"
ect 
our life. We might think of them as angels or saints, bodiless beings that interact 

with humans and help them in many ways. All viable religions have some form of 

devas.
The dwijas are the Òtwice-born.Ó Often this term applies to those who have 
undergone the upanayanam ritual and received the sacred thread (yajnopavita) and 

instruction in the Gayatri mantra, but here a wider sense is meant. The twice-born 
are those who have awakened inwardly, whose consciousness has been quickened 
and is continuing to expand. Such persons may not be perfectly enlightened, but if 

they are ahead of us in evolution they deserve our respect and can beneÞt us by 
their experience.
Teachers have even more experience and are qualiÞed to give spiritual 
instruction and guide their students in their spiritual practice and development. 

These are valuable, indeed.
But most valuable are the sages (prajna), those that are fully awakened, totally 
conscious, knowing themselves and the Absolute. To be with them is to be with 

God and to receive the bounty of God. To Þnd such a rare being is the highest good 
309
fortune if his company is cultivated and his teaching scrupulously followed.
Now here is an interesting question: Since the list ascends in spiritual 
excellence, why were devas/gods at the bottom of the list? Because there is no 
substitute for contact with living, breathing human beings that are examples of the 

ideals we should pursue. More importantly, it is easy to fantasize and believe we are 
in contact with high spiritual beings when it is all a projection of our minds. Even 
worse, we can be duped by the entities known as tramp souls or astral trash that are 

always ready to show up and claim to be everyone from our grandfather, to 
Abraham Lincoln, to Krishna, Buddha, or Jesus. It is important to have as teacher 
an honest human being that will be truthful to us regarding whether or not we are 

practicing correctly and progressing as a consequence. The ego may not like it, but 
the spirit will be liberated. That is why Vyasa, the greatest sage of India, sent his 
son Sukadeva to King Janaka of Mithila for spiritual instruction, rather than 

teaching him himself. This was necessary so the father and son egos could not 
intrude themselves and prevent absolute honesty from prevailing.
Krishna has presented us with four disciplines that are necessary for physical 
tapasya: purity (shaucha), rectitude (arjavam), celibacy (brahmacharya), and non-

violence (ahimsa). Here is how 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
 deÞnes them:
Arjavam: 
Straightforwardness; honesty; rectitude (from the verb root rinj: Òto 
make straight.Ó
Ahimsa:
 Non-injury in thought, word, and deed; non-violence; non-killing; 
harmlessness.
Shaucha:
 Purity; cleanliness.

Brahmacharya:
 Continence; self-restraint on all levels; discipline.
We must realize that Krishna is presenting us with a total package. To lack a 
single one of the elements listed in this verse is to lack in physical tapasya.
Tapasya of speech
Speech which causes no distress or vexation, truthful, pleasant, beneÞcial, 
instruction in the knowledge of the Self: these are called tapasya of speech 
(17:15).
Anudvegakaram vakyam
, has three meanings: 1) speech that does not cause 
distress; 2) speech that does not overawe; 3) speech that does not cause 

apprehension. And it means all three.
First, it is speech that does not cause the hearer to feel anxious or coerced, to 
feel that he must do what he is told or dire things will result. Such speech makes 

him feel that doom is hanging over him, and that the speakerÐor his ideasÐalone can 

avert disaster. Such speech disturbs the hearerÕs peace of mind, making him feel 
pressured.
Second, it is speech that does not make the hearer feel minimized, 
disempowered, and insigniÞcant. It does not make him feel that the biggers and 

betters know what is right, not him, and that if he does not do what they say is 
right then he is bad, even evil. He does not dare to contradict or deny what they say. 
310
Often, he does not even question or rebel against such bullying, but bows his head 
and complies and conforms.
Third, it is speech that does not cause fear. Sadly, fear and greed are the prime 
motivators of most human beings. So fear is used on all sides by those that intend 

to make proÞt from the duped person, whether it be advertising, medicine, politics, 
ecology, health, religion or social pressures. The many-headed monster of fear has 
been shaping humanity from its beginning.
Of course, this all overlaps. The three aspects cross-pollinate one another. As I 
have mentioned, in the Þnal analysis negative speech is a form of coercion, of 

bullying. And it comes into every aspect of our life, though it is popular and safe to 

attribute it to religion exclusively.
Satyam
 is speech that is absolutely true, both from a factual standpoint and from 
the reality of things. Satyam leads to ultimate truth when practiced 

uncompromisingly. Satyam reveals the truth of things, and never implies anything 
false or veiled. Satyam is plain and straightforward.
Priya
 is speech that is agreeable and pleasant, even kindly and endearing.
Hitam
 is that which is beneÞcial and wholesome. So it is informative and 
improves the status of its hearersÐif they listen. It is not trivial chitchat and small 
talk. It makes the hearer better for the hearing.
Swadhyayabhyasanam
 is the practice of study of oneself (self-analysis). This is not 
imposed on the aspirant, it is a voluntary thing altogether. It must be altogether 

self-motivated, coming from no other source than an awakening consciousness
All of this is tapasya of speechÐspeech that includes the exercise of thought and 
intelligence.
Tapasya of mind
Tranquility of mind, kindliness, silence, self-control and purity of the 
mental state: these are called tapasya of the mind (17:16).
Sri Ramakrishna often said: Òthe mind is everything,Ó so this is of extreme 
importance.
Manaprasada
 means a mind that is peaceful, clear, calm, and of a positive 
disposition towards others.
Saumyatwam
, means gentleness, benevolence, and mildness.
Maunam
 is silence in the sense of stillness, or absence of mental chatter. In such 
positive silence intuition manifests and dominates, imparting a knowing that is 
beyond mere talk.
Atmavinigraha
, is self-restraint, self-control. It is not mere discipline, but real 
mastery of the mindÐand therefore of the entire being.
Bhavasamshuddi
 is purity of the state of being, including the entire state of mind 
and heart.
What Krishna describes is a state, a condition, of the mind, not a veneer of 
speech and action that may mask just the opposite of what he describes. As my 
beloved friend, Swami Sivananda, put on the wall of the satsang hall as a motto and 
311
had printed on pencils he gave out: BE good; DO good. First we must be what we 
aspire to; then we can act truthfully and positively. In the West we continually get 
cause and e
"
ect reversed, thinking that if we act and speak in a certain way it will 
make us what we appear to be. That is terribly wrong. We must get to the root of 

things, to the consciousness of which the mind is an instrument. We must practice 
tapasya of mind.
Sattwic tapasya
This threefold tapasya practiced with the highest faith by those without 
desire for fruits and steadfast, is considered to be sattwic (17:17).
There are some key words we should look at in this verse to appreciate its 
profound meaning.
Shraddhaya paraya
, highest faith, means 
mumukshutwa
: intense desire or yearning 
for liberation (moksha). This is the sole basis for sattwic tapasya, the primary trait 
of a sattwic spiritual aspirant.
Although tapasya accomplishes many things in the life and mind of a tapaswin 
(one who engages in tapasya), not the least of them is intense puriÞcation and 

opening of higher faculties of awareness. All those aspects of sattwic tapasya are 
but the means to the single end: liberation of the spirit. Thus it is called 

aphalakankshibhir
Ðwithout desire for personal gain (fruit) in the egoic sense, though 
of course moksha is the supreme attainment (paramartha).
Such an aspirant is then described as 
yuktaih
Ðalways Òin yoga,Ó through the 
continual Þxing of the mind upon the Highest.
Such are the sattwic, and such is sattwic tapasya.
Rajasic tapasya
Tapasya which is practiced with hypocrisy to gain acceptance, honor and 
reverence, is declared to be rajasic, unstable, and transitory (17:18).
Three words are used in the Þrst line:

Satkara
, which means honor, reverence, favor, or hospitality. Literally, it means 
Ògood-doing,Ó so it implies that the rajasic tapaswin wants to be thought well of in 
general, which of course will result in the four meanings just listed. 
Mana
, which 
means honor and respect. 
Puja
, which usually is translated as Òworship,Ó but can 
also mean reverence akin to worship. In India they basically go together. Guru puja 

is quite common, and almost as common is the claim of disciples that their guru is 
really an avatar, a divine incarnation. This is carried to absurd lengths all the time. 
Contrary to BuddhaÕs assertions, many contemporary Indian teachers are Þngers 

pointing to themselvesÐnot to the goal of nirvana.
Dambhena
 means fraudulent and hypocritical. Such people supposedly engage in 
extreme ascetic actions and continually have the most exalted experiences. But 

when you look closer it is all pu
"
 and patter. They do nothing but sit around being 
adored and toadying to the rich and the inßuential, occasionally emitting a string of 
platitudes whose banality is astonishingÐbut not as amazing as the mindless 
312
plaudits of their admirers.
Swami Sri Yukteswar, the guru of Paramhansa Yogananda, continually cautioned 
people to never believe the claims made about yogis, especially the claims made by 
their disciples. Rather, he counseled them to carefully examine matters for 

themselves. As a young man he heard of a yogi who always slept in a state of 
levitation. So he hid under the yogiÕs bed and waited. Nothing but snores. So he 
crawled from under the bed and said in a loud voice: ÒI donÕt see any levitationÐonly 

sleep!Ó The yogi woke up, and to cover himself shouted: ÒI wondered why I did not 
levitate tonight as usual. You were spying on me!Ó The young Priya Nath merely 
laughed and went his way, not impressed by the declaration.
Pious hypocrisy is common coin of the crowd-pleaser. It is a favorite ploy in 
India to claim that you spent decades doing intense tapasya in the Himalayas. I 

personally know one Big Baba of Bengal who claims he spent over twenty years in 

the Himalayas, when investigation easily shows that he was a building contractor in 
Calcutta all the time! Swami Sivananda humorously wrote some instruction for 
these people. First, he said, rent a little house (kutir) in Rishikesh or Hardwar for 

six months. Arrange to have your food brought to you, and never be seen by 
anybody. Sit around inside and do what you like, including a lot of sleep. During 
that time write two or three Òtrash leaßetsÓ (his expression) and a couple of bad 

devotional songs (bhajans). Then at the end of the six months go down to the 
plains and put it out that you have been living in silence (mauna) for many years 
way up in the Himalayas, even beyond Uttar Kashi. Arrange for yourself a few 

meetings where you will talk aimlessly, sing your bad songs, and give out your 
worthless leaßets. In no time at all you will be a sought-after guru, and maybe even 
an avatar.
This is no idle allegation. Once in Rishikesh I was stopped and grilled by a fairly 
well-educated ÒsadhuÓ who begged me to tell him how to get to America and make 

a splash. On another occasion in holy Naimisharanya a monk told me that if I 

would spend a few hours with him each day for a week, ÒI will show you how to get 
the people of America in the palm of your hand.Ó And he even held up the palm of 
his hand as he said it. That is how these people think. Rajasic is too nice a word for 

it.
Krishna winds up the subject by saying that rajasic tapasya, besides its obvious 
ßaws, is worthless because it is 
chalam
Ðunsteady and waveringÐand 
adhruvam
Ð
impermanent, inÞrm, and unÞxed. This is because rajas by its nature is restless and 
changing. A rajasic person does not hold single-mindedly to anything for long. 
Therefore any tapasya will be impermanent, especially because it is not oriented 

toward the unchanging and ever-existent Absolute, but rather toward the ever-
changing and unsteady ego-dream.
Tamasic tapasya
Tapasya which is practiced with deluded notions of the Self, and self-
torture, or for the purpose of harming another, is declared to be tamasic 
313
(17:19).
There is a lot to look at here, and all unpleasant. But the result will be positive.
Mudhagrahenatmano
 means with deluded or confused understanding or concept 
of the Atman, the Self. This is a crucial point. For if there is no right understanding 
of the nature of our Self, we will do a great deal of foolish and pointless things. This 
is true of religion in general. In Sanatana Dharma alone is there a clear 
understanding of the Atman-Self. And if you do not even know who or what you 

are, how can you even live life in a sensible manner? Most people do not. What 
kind of religion can we have if we have no clue as to what we really are? Any 
discipline will be as mistaken as our ideas about ourself. This is why most religion 

is destructive, as are the disciplinesÐor lack thereof.
When people mistake their physical and psychic makeup for their Self, they 
cannot help but misunderstand what is really needed for spiritual life, and will 

waste their time to no purpose, ultimately harming themselves. Such persons will 
often engage in 
padaya
Ðtorture or torment. They will torture the body with 
strenuous and painful actions, even mutilating it or hastening its death by injury to 
its health. Ritual mutilation is often practiced on their own bodies by those engaged 
in negative ascesis. Or just the opposite: they will harm the body through deluded 
indulgence and lack of discipline or puriÞcation. But most of all they will torment 

their Self by burying it beneath ignorant ideas and actions, clouding and distorting 
their minds so there is no hope of comprehending true spiritual matters or 
disciplines. They will live a life contrary to their real spirit-nature, and thus bring 

nothing but su
"
ering to themselves and others.
Finally, tamasic tapasya is sometimes engaged in as a kind of evil magical 
practice whose intention is to gain the power to harm another, or to placate 

negative entities who will do the harming on behalf of the tapaswin. I am sorry to 
say that this is found in India even to this day. I know of a ÒsadhuÓ who lives in a 
temple in Kerala and does incredibly complex and strenuous disciplines to get such 

power. This man was once hired to bring about the death of a friend of mine, 
supposedly through placation of a Òdeity.Ó Fortunately a letter from this evil man to 
the one hiring him was missent to my friend, who spiritually armed himself and 

came to no harm.
The expression used for this in the text is 
parasyotsadanartham
, which means the 
destruction of another, but it can also mean for the overturning or defeat of another. 

This is often the aim of such tapasya: either the unseating of a person in authority 
or advantage, or the bringing about of his loss of money, position, or reputation.
Sometimes tapasya is engaged in just to be thought Òmore ascetic than thouÓ in 
relation to others engaged in spiritual discipline. A kind of ascetic one-upmanship 

and rivalry is often found among monastics of all religions. This was especially the 
case in Christian monasticism in the Egyptian desert during the third century (and 

after) when enough time had lapsed for the Church to have greatly forgotten what 
Jesus had really taught about spiritual life and discipline. Regarding this, in his 
book, 
Benedictine Monachism
, Dom Cuthbert Butler wrote:
314
ÒThe spirit, the dominating principle of this monachism, may be thus 
characterized. It was a spirit of individualism. Each worked for his personal advance 
in virtue; each strove to do his utmost in all kinds of ascetical exercises and 
austerities, in prolonging his fasts, his prayers, his silence. The favorite name to 

describe any of the prominent monks was Ôgreat athlete.Õ And they were athletes, 
and Þlled with the spirit of the modern athlete. They loved to Ômake a recordÕ in 
austerities, and to contend with one another in mortiÞcations; and they would 

freely boast of their spiritual achievements. One who had seen them describes the 
Nitrian monks as Ôsurpassing one another in virtues, and being Þlled with a spirit of 
rivalry in asceticism, showing forth all virtue, and striving to outdo one another in 

manner of life.Õ But it is in PalladiusÕ account of Macarius of Alexandria that this 
spirit shows itself most conspicuously: ÔIf he ever heard of any one having 
performed a work of asceticism, he was all on Þre to do the same;Ó and Palladius 

illustrates it by examples. Did Macarius hear that another monk ate nothing but 
one pound of bread a day? For three years he ate each day only what broken bread 
he could extract in a single handful through the narrow neck of a jar. Did he hear 

that the monks of PachomiusÕ monastery ate nothing cooked by Þre throughout 
Lent? He did the same for seven years. Did he hear that their observance was 
ÒÒgreatÓÓ? He did not rest satisÞed till he had gone to see, and had beaten them all.Õ 

Thus the practice of asceticism constituted a predominant feature of this type of 
Egyptian monachism. Their prolonged fasts and vigils, their combats with sleep, 
their exposures to heat and cold, their endurance of thirst and bodily fatigue, their 

loneliness and silence, are features that constantly recur in the authentic records of 
the lives of these hermits, and they looked on such austerities as among the 
essential features of the monastic state.Ó Much more crazy things were (and are) 

done, but this is su
!
cient for us to get the ideaÐand hopefully avoid it.
In conclusion
Krishna has given us all this information so we can determine the type and 
quality (guna) of our personal spiritual practice. This alone would make the Gita 
unparalleled in value for those who seek the higher life. And it contains so much 

more.
All glory be to Sri Vyasadeva, the supreme guide of all who aspire to liberation!
315
Charity and the Three Gunas
The Bhagavad Gita is a digest and clariÞcation of the Upanishads, and is 
essentially inseparable from them. In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad it says that 
once the Creator, Prajapati, spoke a single syllable, ÒDa,Ó to his human disciples. 
ÒThen he said: ÔHave you understood?Õ They answered, ÔYes, we have understood. 

You said to us, ÒÒDattaÐBe charitable.ÓÓ ÔYes,Õ agreed Prajapati, Ôyou have 
understood.ÕÓ (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 5:2:2) So 
Dana
, which means: giving, gift, 
charity, almsgiving, self-sacriÞce, donation, and generosity, is both an action and an 
attitude. Krishna considers this an important factor in spiritual life, one which we 
will proÞt from understanding. Once more he analyzes a subject from the aspect of 
its guna-quality.
Sattwic Dana
That gift which is given with the thought: ÒIt is to be given,Ó to a worthy 
person, one who has done no prior favor to the giver, in a proper place at a 
proper time: that gift is considered sattwic (17:20).
This is extremely relevant to us, since at the present time good works and social 
action are becoming the refuge of the morally and spiritually bankrupt as a cover for 

their inner deÞciency. As is to be expected, ignorant people who think that outer 
action equals inner quality, are enthusiastically embracing and applauding this 

fraud. Yogis, too, from both their good will and the sincerityÐoften simplicityÐof 
their hearts may unsuspectingly run in this track as well. For discrimination 
(viveka) is often mistaken for cynicism, and is sure to be denounced by the 

deceivers and the deceived. Delusion is always favored by the deluded. KrishnaÕs 
outline of sattwic dana will not at all be compatible with their fantasiesÐand that 
will be a pretty good indication that it is true and worthy of our attention.
Given with the thought: Òit is to be given.Ó
 This implies that it is not only right to 
give in a moral sense, but that it is a requisite for acting in harmony with cosmic 

law. It is not an option, but a necessityÐat least for those seeking to climb up the 

evolutionary ladder through cooperation with universal law. This has many aspects, 
not the least being that charity is a powerful antidote to negative karmas accrued 
through past greed, selÞshness and hard-hearted refusal to help others. It also heals 

the mind scarred by callous and cruel indi
"
erence to the needs of others.
Given to a worthy person
. 
Patre
 means someone who is worthy or competent, a 
person who is deserving and capable of beneÞting from the gift or assistance. 

Sattwic charity itself must be worthy and competent. That is, it must be intelligent 
and e
"
ective, helping people not just for the moment, but for the future. Sattwic 
charity is not just Òneed drivenÓ on the surface, but must take into account the 

entire situation and be very focused on the quality of the recipients and the ultimate 
results. For example, it is silly to provide roller skates for poor children when they 
316
do not have any shoes. Just recently I heard a brag ad on radio about many 
teenagers working hard to provide cosmetic surgery for poor people. While people 
are starving and wandering the streets homeless, this is absurd. It is like dropping 
candy bars to people in the desert that are dying of thirst. Get them out and give 

them water. This is the sattwic way. Of course, sattwic charity requires personal 
contact and care, something that so many are not willing to provide. They want it 
all done by agencies to which they contribute.
At a proper place
. The environment of the recipient must be taken into careful 
consideration. It would be silly to give aid to someone living on an island where 

atomic testing is scheduled, and not help them to relocate. Sattwic charity is much 

more than the equivalent of impulse buying that is the vogue right now.
In all religious traditions, dana is considered a powerful spiritual, mental, and 
even physical therapy. A perfect example of this is in the life of Saint John Regis. He 

transformed the lives of countless thousands through the spiritual counseling he 
gave in the confessional. Once he had been invited to an out-of-the-way place, and 
even though deep snow had fallen he insisted on traveling on foot to keep his 

promise to the people there. On the way he fell and broke his leg. Finding a stick to 
help him move, and holding to the shoulder of a fellow-traveller, he actually went 
on and kept his appointment. Upon arrival he immediately went to the church and 

into the confessional, despite the protests from those around him. Many hours 
later, after having uninterruptedly heard confessions, he agreed to be examined by a 
doctor, who found that the leg was perfectly healed!
Rajasic dana
But that gift which is given with the aim of recompense, or with regard to 
the givingÕs fruit, or is given reluctantly, is considered rajasic (17:21).
One of the major determinants in religion is disposition of heart. God told the 
prophet Samuel: ÒThe Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward 
appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heartÓ (I Samuel 17:21). Therefore Krishna 
points out in this and the next verse that the inner attitude of the giver reveals the 
predominant quality (guna) of the act. To give grudgingly or unwillingly is a rajasic 

attitude. A great deal of religion is not done willingly, but out of fear, greed, or 
other egoic motives. Since rajas is the guna of action for gain of some kind, he then 
says that any gift that is made with the purpose of getting some personal beneÞt, 

looking for the Þnal result, is of rajas.
As a consequence it would not be amiss to wonder if the giving described in the 
previous verse as sattwic is not really rajasic? For doing the right also produces a 

beneÞt which is surely desired by the sattwic individual. The answer is both yes and 
no. Certainly the sattwic person wants to attain and maintain the Òto be doneÓ 
attitude which tends toward his personal liberation, but the focus of such a desire is 

the transcendent Self, whereas the focus and motivator of the rajasic desire is the 
transient ego. So they are of vastly di
"
ering quality. Further, the sattwic person is 
thinking of the persons to be helped, but the rajasic is thinking of himself. The 
317
sattwic man is unselÞsh, the rajasic man is selÞsh. They are poles apart.
Another form of rajasic dana is that which is done to control the recipients. 
Religions often engage in this to buy converts. Missionaries, Christian and Moslem, 
do this in all third world countries quite shamelessly, even proudly.
Tamasic dana
The gift which is given at the wrong place or time, to unworthy persons, 
without respect or with disdain, is declared to be tamasic (17:22).
An unworthy person is someone who will not beneÞt from the gift (or 
assistance), either because of innate incapacity or perverse attitude, or who will 
deny being beneÞtted, or who demands something di
"
erent or more. We all have 
seen this to some extent. An unworthy person is also one who does not even need 
the gift, but pretends to. So is one who is quite capable of helping himself, but sees 

no need to if someone will do it for him.
It is virtually impossible to expand on what is meant by Òthe wrong placeÓ and 
Òthe wrong time,Ó since each individual situation determinesÐand often revealsÐ

that.
ÒWithout paying respect, or with contemptÓ can be either hidden or obvious. I 
have personally known people involved in welfare programs that thoroughly 

despised the people they were distributing bounty to, and as a result being adored 
by them as their personal great White Father or Mother. How ironic. I have heard 
people make utterly contemptuous remarks about the people they were going to go 

out and Òmake niceÓ to, even getting tearful with fake ÒcaringÓ for those they 
denigrated. On the other hand, many tamasic people are overtly disdainful of those 
they are helping. This is particularly true of religious charities, especially the 

Protestant ones. I do not say this out of prejudice, but from a lifetime of 
observation. Those involved in Catholic charities are consistently kind and truly 
interested in those they help. Protestants, being the proud originators of Òthe work 

ethic,Ó are usually just foremen, herding Òthe rabbleÓ and obviously just Òcleaning 
up the mess.Ó Again, I have seen this myself, especially in Òrescue missionÓ 
endeavors. Just as jailers consider all inmates guilty and deserving of little but a 

hard time, so these people consider their charges nothing but lazy nuisances who 
really deserve being booted out onto the street and allowed to su
"
er or else 
rounded up as vagrants and put in jail.
Something greater
God and our Self are beyond the three gunas, and so are those who even while 
living in this world have ascended enough in consciousness to have attained or be 
very near liberation from the compulsion of birth and death (on the earth, at least). 
So Krishna is describing their action, a fourth degree beyond even sattwa. First he 

introduces a mantra that should accompany all good action.
ÒOm, Tat, Sat;Ó this is known as the triple designation of Brahman. By this 
were created of old the Brahmanas, Vedas, and SacriÞce (17:23).
318
ÒCreatedÓ is a rather weak translation of 
vihitas
, which means ÒconstitutedÓ in 
the sense of ordained, apportioned, arranged, or determined. This is an important 
distinction, because according to the Upanishads and Gita nothing is created in the 
way Western religions mean by the word. Rather, everything is 
manifested
 from the 
ever-existent Being of Brahman.
Om, Tat, and Sat have various levels of meaning. Paramhansa Yogananda 
explained that they indicate the real meaning of the Christian Trinity: Sat, Òthe Real, 

the True,Ó is the transcendental Absolute, the ÒFather;Ó Tat, ÒThat,Ó is the 
immanent Consciousness in all things, the ÒSon,Ó that possesses attributes and can 
therefore be spoken about and indicated (as ÒThatÓ); Om is the Cosmic Vibration, 

the ÒHoly Spirit,Ó which 
is
 all things within which the Son dwells as the Knower 
and Controller.
Om is the object; Tat is the subject; and Sat is the substratum of existence and 
consciousness by and in which the Þrst two exist or consist.
Om is the substance and action of sacriÞce; Tat is intelligence and knowledge 
(Veda); and Sat is the illumined consciousness of the knowers of BrahmanÐfor it is 

itself Brahman.
All this is implied by a thoughtful and intentional invocation of ÒOm Tat Sat.Ó So 
Krishna continues:
Therefore the acts of sacriÞce, gift and tapasya prescribed by the scriptures 
are always begun uttering ÒOmÓ by the Brahmavadins (those who walk the 

path to Brahman). Uttering ÒTatÓ without interest in fruits, acts of sacriÞce, 

tapasya and the various acts of gift are performed by the seekers of liberation. 
ÒSatÓ is used in its meaning of Reality and Goodness; so also the word ÒSatÓ 
is used in the sense of an auspicious act (17:24-26).
This needs no comment.
Steadfastness in sacriÞce, tapasya and gift is called ÒSat.Ó And action in 
connection with these is designated as ÒSatÓ (17:27).
The highest form of action not only leads to Brahman, it 
is
 Brahman in an 
incomprehensible manner. So those that continually engage in such action are living 
in Brahman as manifestations of Brahman. This is the supreme level of Karma Yoga.
Whatever is sacriÞced, given or done, and whatever tapasya is practiced 
without faith, is called ÒAsatÓ [Unreal]. It is naught here or hereafter (after 

death) (17:28).
Such an act is not condemned or fulminated against with declarations that God 
despises or even hates it. Not at all: it simply does not exist in the world of the 

Real. And whatever our apparent status, that is the world (loka) in which the real 

part of us, the Self, ever exists.
319
Sannyasa and Tyaga
Although the Gita covers all aspects of the spiritual aspirant, it is primarily 
psychological, showing us the states of mind needed for the successful pursuit of 
Brahmanirvana, the realization of God. Now in this closing chapter Krishna will be 
enunciating truths that are indispensable to the sadhaka. First, Arjuna himself asks 

about two key concepts:
Arjuna said: I desire to know separately the essential nature of sannyasa 
and tyaga (18:1).
Dictionary deÞnition
Sannyasa literally means total [
san
] throwing away [
as
], absolute rejection. In 
contemporary usage, sannyasa always means formal renunciation, formal monastic 
life. But in the Gita it is the mental state of thoroughgoing renunciation, of 
uncompromising abandonment of all that is unÞt and unworthy, of intense 

dispassion toward the things of the world, both internal and external.
Tyaga literally means Òabandonment,Ó the turning from all that hinders the 
realization of the Self. In the Gita, tyaga means renunciation in the sense of the 

relinquishment of the fruit of action. Sri Ramakrishna said ÒWhat is the message of 
the 
Gita
? It is what happens when you repeat it ten times. If 
Gita 
is repeated ten 
times it comes to sound like 
tagi 
[tyagiÐone who renounces]. This is the teaching of 
the 
Gita
ÐÔOh man, try to realize God by giving up everything.Õ Be he a holy man 
[sadhu] or a worldly man, he has to give up all attachment from the mind.Ó Again 
we see that this is primarily psychological. One of the saddest sights in India are the 

many men who thought that they need only wander around in gerua clothes to be 
sannyasisÐtyagis. Now they have found it is not so, but are trapped and go here and 
there intent on nothing but food and shelter, becoming daily more and more 

materialistically minded. What their next life will be, who can say? But this one will 
likely not be a step up.
Philosophical deÞnition
Now Krishna begins the answer to ArjunaÕs query:
The Holy Lord said: The renunciation of actions arising from desire the 
sages understand as sannyasa. The abandonment of the fruits of all action the 
wise declare to be tyaga (18:2).
Sannyasa in this chapter, then, simply means the giving up of all action 
motivated by 
kama
, by egocentric desire or emotion (passion). Other actions are 
permitted the seeker, as are other kinds of desire. For example, mumukshutwa, 
which is intense desire or yearning for liberation (moksha), is permitted, for it 

arises from the Self, not the ego. Action which maintains the body, such as eating or 
taking medicine with the desire for continued life and good health, is also 
320
acceptable, if life and health are desired so sadhana can be continued. So also is any 
action based on a desire to help others. It is important to understand this, because 
many unripe aspirants get the mistaken idea that any desire whatsoever is 
detrimental, and that monks or dedicated yogis cannot engage in any actionÐ

something that is impossible for the living.
Sannyasa, then, is external, even though based on internal disposition. Tyaga, 
however, is completely mental, a state of both thought and attitude. It is perfect 

dispassion toward the results of any actionÐnot from disinterest or indi
"
erence, but 
because all actions engaged in are Òto be doneÓ in and of themselves. Even if no 
overt result comes, it does not matter. It is the simple doing that matters. Of 

course, even then there is a positive result from having acted in consonance with 
the cosmic order: Ritam.
Vyasa presents these two to us because total consistency is necessary for success 
in spiritual pursuit. As Jesus said in aphorism twenty-two of the Gospel of Thomas: 

ÒWhen you make the inside like the outside and the outside like the inside, and the 
above like the below,É then will you enter the kingdom.Ó
Making it practical
Now we come to a section that cannot be ignored if we would intelligently and 
e
"
ectively lead the yoga life. Let us be sure to now have the Òears to hearÓ of which 
Jesus so emphatically spoke.
Some men of wisdom declare that all action should be abandoned as an 
evil, while others declare that sacriÞce, gift and tapasya should not be 

abandoned. Hear from me the conclusion regarding tyaga. Tyaga has been 
designated to be of three kinds. Acts of sacriÞce, gift and tapasya should not 

be abandoned, but should be done. SacriÞce, gift and tapasya are puriÞers of 
the wise (18:3-5).
This is so reasonable that it seems impossible that anyone could see it 
otherwise. But it is not so. In India yogis and monks that engage in social service 

and spiritual education are usually looked upon as second-rate, if not downright 
deluded or hypocritical. I cannot count the number of times I have heard that my 

beloved Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh was Ònot a real sadhu, just a karma yogi.Ó 
His overßowing love and solicitude, his mammoth caring heart, caused many to say: 
ÒOh, he is not a sannyasi, he is more like someoneÕs grandfather!Ó The nobly 

sacriÞcing sadhus of Ramakrishna Mission, because they have hospitals in which 
they care for the sick and dying, are contemptuously referred to as Òbedpan 
swamis.Ó
A nurse once saw a man severely injured and lying in a busy road. When she 
tried to pull him to safety, she found he was too heavy for her to manage. Two 

sadhus were sitting nearby on a bridge watching unconcernedly. She begged them 

to help her, and got the answer: ÒWe are sadhus; we canÕt do things like that.Ó But 
Krishna makes it clear that no one is exempted from doing what is right and good. 
After all, what else does God do eternally? Who is above God?
321
Not surprisingly, Krishna says that renunciation can be tamasic, rajasic, or 
sattwic.
But renunciation of obligatory action is not proper. Abandonment of these 
from delusion is declared to be tamasic. (18:7).
Moha
 (delusion) means mistaken attachment or aversion.
He who abandons action from fear of trouble or of pain, does not obtain 
the fruit of that renunciation; he performs rajasic renunciation (18:8).
Dukham
 (pain) means stressful or unpleasant. The Þnal clause literally means: 
ÒHaving performed rajasic tyaga, he cannot attain to (real) fruit-renouncing tyaga.Ó
When work is done because it is a duty (ought to be done), disciplined, 
having abandoned attachment and the fruit as well, that renunciation is 

considered sattwic (18:9).
Perfect attitude
The man of renunciation, wise, Þlled with sattwa, with doubt eliminated, 
does not dislike disagreeable work, nor is he attached to agreeable work. 
Truly, embodied beings are not able to give up actions entirely; but he who 
relinquishes the fruit of action is called a man of renunciation (18:10-11).
Three kinds of fruit
For those who have not renounced, the fruit of action is threefold when 
they depart this world: undesired, desired and mixed; but for the renouncers 
there is none whatever (18:12).
ÒUndesirableÓ and ÒdesirableÓ are of course according to the non-renouncerÕs 
ego, binding him even more by his evaluation/reaction to them.
This second clause is a powerful truth: It is possible to act and accrue no karma 
whatsoever. It is a matter of consciousness.
322
Deeper Insights On Action
We are in the Þnal chapter of the Gita, so Vyasa, assuming that we have listened 
and learned the basic facts regarding action, now goes into the subject on a more 
detailed level, intending that when we have assimilated these teachings we will be 
ready to successfully engage in lifeÕs actions like Arjuna.
Five factors of action
Learn from me these Þve factors for the accomplishment of all actions, 
declared in the Sankhya (18:13).
This is one of those verses wherein those that adhere to philosophies other than 
Sankhya put in words more to their liking such as Òthe scripturesÓ or Òthe wise.Ó 
But the word is 
Sankhya
.
 Karana
, which can be translated Òfactor,Ó also means an 
instrument or a cause. All three meanings apply in this verse. Now here are the Þve:
The body, the doer, the functions of various kinds, the various distinct 
activities, and the divine overseer as the Þfth. Whatever action a man 
performs with his body, speech, or mindÐeither right or wrongÐthese are its 
Þve factors (18:14-15).
So every single action involves Þve elements. An analysis of them will reveal the 
extremely complex nature of any action, and how it can be that the simplest action 

can bind us with the bonds of karma.
1) The 
adhishthanam
, the seat or abodeÐof what? Of all the subtle bodies, 
including the mind and intellect, and ultimately the abode of the Self. This being so, 

far more than the physical body is involved here. Five bodies come into the picture, 

in fact.
2) 
Karta
, the Doer. Since we are consistently told by the Gita that the 
Paramatman and the jivatman never engage in action, it is the ego-sense that is the 

real doer.
3) 
Karanam
: Bodily ÒinstrumentsÓ such as the hands, feet, etc., by which the 
body itself acts in relation to outside objects or situations.
4) 
Vividhashcha prithakcheshta, 
the many actions or functions of the pranas within 
the physical and subtle bodies. Also anything that takes place internally.
5) 
Daivim: 
In the Upanishads the devas are said to preside over the senses, even 
to control them. This idea has doubtless come about through considering the 
individual body as a reßection or model of the Cosmic Body in which the gods are 
the controlling powers. However that may be, Krishna (Vyasa) does not say devas, 

but daivimÐthat which is of the 
quality
 or 
capacity
 of the devas. Since ÒdevaÓ literally 
means Òshining one,Ó the idea of daivim in this verse is that which illumines the 

experiences of the body, in other words, the sensesÐboth as instruments and as 

powers of perception.
No wonder we are bound up in the net of our actionsÐeven the simplest and 
323
most innocent ones! There are no small or insigniÞcant acts. Since every single deed 
involves a tremendous amount of instruments, it also produces e
"
ects on those 
instruments, which include our mind and heart. Is it any wonder, then, that Krishna 
has already said: ÒThis divine illusion [maya] of mine made of the gunas 

[gunamayi] is di
!
cult to go beyondÓ (7:14)?
The dream and the dreamer
This being so, he who sees himself as the actual doer does not really see, 
because he does not have a perfect (complete) understanding (18:16).
Akritabuddhhitvan
 means to have an incomplete, imperfect, or unperfected 
understanding. An important implication here is that the individual is capable of 
perfecting his understanding, and therefore he must. But until he does so, he will 
misunderstand himself and the world around him. For him, all his experiences and 

those involved in them are only a dream.
The dreamlike nature of the world is perceived the world over, though it is a 
doctrinal principle only in Sanatana DharmaÐa revealing fact. Even poets such as 

Edgar Allan Poe (ÒAll that we see or seem is but a dream within a dream.Ó) and 
Shelley (ÒLift not the painted veil which those who ÔliveÕ call ÔLife.ÕÓ) wrote about 
the dream-nature of the world.
As long as we are asleep and dreaming we cannot really see the truth about 
action. But we can listen to those who are awake and receive their understanding 

and act accordingly. Even more, the truly awake can show us the way to our own 

awakening, the way of yoga. It is only through meditation that our understanding 
can truly be perfected, for in their highest reaches understanding and intellect 
(buddhi) are purely consciousness. And only yoga works with consciousness. All 

other things, however beneÞcial, a
"
ect only the lesser parts of our being.
The puriÞed consciousness
He whose state of mind is not egoistic, whose intellect is not tainted, even 
though he slays all these people, he does not slay, neither is he bound (by 
karmic consequences) (18:17).
He who transcends the condition of forming karmic bonds is one whose very 
state of beingÐbhava, consciousness, outlook, attitude, and interior dispositionÐis 

nahamkrito
, not partaking of ego (ahankara) in any way. That is, he is established in 

the Self which is eternally free from ego. It is important to realize that he did not rid 
himself of ego; rather, he established himself in his true swabhava of the divine 
Atman that has never even been touched by ego. Having gone beyond the ego, he 

had no need to do anything in relation to it, for it was always only a shadow, only a 
false appearance.
The intelligence/intellect (buddhi) of such a person is 
na lipyate
Ðnot tainted. 
Lipyate means ÒbefouledÓ or Òbesmeared.Ó But he is not even slightly touched by 

egoism. He no longer dreams that he acts as an entity separate from Brahman or 
that, separate from Brahman, he reaps the consequences of those acts. After his 
324
enlightenment, Buddha was walking down the road and met a Brahmin who asked 
him: ÒWho are you?Ó He simply answered: ÒI am awake,Ó and kept on walking. 
Krishna is speaking of one who, like Buddha, has awakened into the reality of the 
Self, leaving the mirage of ego far behind.
Having abandoned the realm of ego, or relative existence seemingly separate 
from Brahman, he neither acts nor is bound by action. He cannot be, any more than 

Brahman can. It is a matter of true nature.
The three inciters to action
We have been told about the Þve factors of all action. Now we are going to be 
told about the three things that move us to actionÐor to the dream of actionÐand 
the three things that carry out the motivation.
Knowledge, the known and the knower are the threefold impulse to 
action. The instrument, the action and the doer are the threefold constituents 

of action (18:18).
Perception, perceiving, and the perceiverÐthese three incite to action. It is all in 
the realm of objective consciousness. Perception impels us to action mostly from 

the impulse to avoid unpleasant experience and to gain pleasant experience. 
Perception is also internal, so there is also the avoidance of unpleasant feelings and 

the desire for pleasant feelings. It is very much the same with the objects of 
perception for which we have an attraction (raga) or aversion (dwesha). The 
perceiver meant here is not the ultimate perceiver, the Self, but the mind/intellect 

which also acts on the pleasure/pain, like/dislike, good/bad principles, and other 
dualities.
The three basics of action listed here are 
karanam, karma
, and 
karta
. Karanam is 
the instrument or means of action. This has been covered in detail in the previous 

section. Karma is the act itself, used here to mean 
doing
Ðthe expenditure of will and 
energy to accomplish something. Karta means the agent, or doerÐagain, in this 
instance meaning the whole body/mind/ego complex, and not the ultimate Self.
Just see what is involved in understanding karma. What then to say of Karma 
Yoga? No wonder that Swami Sivananda Hridayananda (ÒDoctor MotherÓ) told a 

group that came to see her at the Sivananda Yoga Vedanta Center in Chicago: ÒI 
have known only one real karma yogi: Swami Sivananda.Ó
No surprise to us who have come this far in the Gita!
325
Knowledge, Action, Doer,
and the Three Gunas
Understanding the three gunas and their application in life is obviously very 
important to Krishna. Right away in his instructions to Arjuna that begin in the 
second chapter, he introduces the subject of the gunas in verse 45, saying: ÒThe 
Vedas are such that their scope is conÞned to the three gunas; be free from those 

three gunas.Ó Scattered throughout the Gita are teachings on the gunas, and now 
here in the closing chapter he takes up the subject.
It is said in the doctrine of the three gunas (the Sankhya Philosophy) that 
knowledge, action and the doer are of three kinds: hear them also duly 

(18:19).
Sattwic knowledge
That by which one sees the one indestructible Being in all beings, 
undivided in the divided (many)Ðknow that knowledge to be sattwic (18:20).
Notice: real knowledge is a matter of 
seeing
, not merely thinking or believing. 
And the true seeing is the vision of Unity. Simple, but not easy.

Rajasic knowledge
But that knowledge which sees in all beings di
"
erent beings of various 
kinds, know that knowledge to be rajasic (18:21).
This is a very problematical viewpoint, whether taken socially, religiously, or 
personally. To conceive of oneself as a isolated point in space, absolutely separate 
from everything, a spirit separate from the mind, the body, the surrounding world, 

all other sentient beings, and even God, is a terrible seed that grows into the multi-
headed monster of dual consciousness: a through ticket to constant rebirth and 
accumulating ignorance. The su
"
ering inherent in such a view is potentially 

colossal. The only view more unfortunate is that of tamas, whose description 
Krishna now gives.
Tamasic ÒknowledgeÓ
But that knowledge which clings to a single e
"
ect as if it were the whole, 
and without reason, without basis in truth and trivialÐthat is declared to be 
tamasic (18:22).
Since the world of humanity is in the death-grip of tamas, we need to analyze 
this, for we have become so used to it that we often miss the awful implications in 

such a view.
Clings to a single e
!
ect as if it were the whole
. This is a constant in modern society. 
People are absolute idolators of their mentally lazy clich”sÐwhether social, political, 
326
religious, scientiÞc, or personal. There is only one right way to do a thing, or to 
think, worship, eat, behave, etc., etc. ÒMy way is the only wayÓ is the fundamental 
principle. ÒAll the ills of the world will vanish if everyone thinks and acts like me,Ó 
is the doctrine. Often a single thing is chosen and harped on constantly, as if there 

is no wider picture. Simplistic is the watchword. Simple, lazy, and stupidÐthat sums 
it all up. A refusal to learn anything new is necessary for the maintenance of this 
tamasic condition.
Without reason
. ÒThe [insert name of scripture] says it and I believe it!Ó The same 
with prophets, teachers, parents, and whoever has put a thumbprint in their brain. 

No need to think: they have been 
told
. Religion and scienceÐincluding medicineÐare 
the two major o
"
enders, working untold harm. Put a label on it and that is what it 
is! Deny its existence and it ceases to be. No need for facts or intelligent 
consideration, they only confuse us and make troubleÉ.
Without basis in truth
. One of the Þrst things I observed about people was their 
utter purposelessness because they had no grasp of the truth, the reality, of things 

and situations. Even when only a few years old, I saw that the people around me 

were learning nothing, doing nothing, and being nothing. I realized that when they 
died it would be as though they had not even been born. And the whole society was 
set up to produce and perpetuate this state of pointlessness. I had no intention of 

being caught in the net. I had no idea what I was going to do, but I knew it would 
not be what they were doing.
This trait also implies living or thinking in a manner that simply leads nowhere. 
ÒEver learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truthÓ (II Timothy 

3:7), is how Saint Paul described it. Most people are just running in the hamster 
wheel made for them, thinking that they are living and going somewhere.
Trivial
. Small-mindedness is a requisite for contemporary life. The absurd 
popularity of trivia books, games, and suchlike demonstrates this. People hardly 

read books, and when they do they are unbooksÐbooks of trivia facts, the Þrst of 

which was the bestseller 
The Book of Lists
. It is considered an advantage if a book 
need not be read completely, but just picked up and grazed in at random. As 

Dietrich von Hildebrand, the great Catholic philosopher, pointed out in his 

writings, modern people su
"
er from what he called Òdiscontinuity,Ó the inability to 
sustain anything that requires more than minimal thought or will. So of course the 
previously-cited traits apply to them. It is as though everyone has ADD. For this 

reason society is run by those whose greed and lust for power (and often simple 
dedication to evil) motivate them and enable them to sustain their intentions and 
endeavors. The loonies and racketeers really have taken over the asylum because the 

sta
"
 is sleepwalking through life.
Sattwic action
Action which is ordained and free from attachment, done without 
attraction or aversion [raga-dwesha], with no desire to obtain the fruitÐthat 
action is said to be sattwic (18:23).
327
Having come this far in the Gita, on the surface this verse needs no comment, 
but there are some points it will be good to look at. The word 
niyatam
, here 
translated as Òordained,Ó literally means controlled or subdued, the idea being that 
sattwic action is that which is done as discipline, as a symptom of mastery of the 

lower levels of being. Although sattwic action is done without attachment, 
sangarahitam
 also means Òwithout clinging [sanga]Ó as well as without attachment. 
A sattwic person can let go of his actions, let what is done be done and the past 

truly be the past and move onward. This is no small capability.
Rajasic action
But that action done with desire for the fulÞllment of desires, with self-
centeredness, or furthermore is done with much e
"
ort, is considered rajasic 
(18:24).
Krishna is not saying that everything should be easy, but that ÒbusynessÓ is 
rajasic. I think we all know people who are always running around doing things 

(often undeÞned) and talking about how rushed they are, but we see little results. 

This is the mental trait of rajas manifesting externally: people always Òon the goÓ 
but staying in one place. I once saw a sign that said: ÒWould you rather work 
smarter or harder?Ó Rajasic people prefer to work harder. Their inner nervousness 

and instability manifest this way. Change for the simple sake of change is an aspect 
of this, as is the constant insistence of things being new or up to date. On many 
levels of our American society this is an obsessive compulsion.
Disorganization is also a trait of rajas.
Tamasic action
That action which is undertaken because of delusion, without regard to 
the consequences of loss, injury or oneÕs own abilityÐthat is said to be tamasic 

(18:25).
This is quite clear, so I only want to say: Blessed are they that know what they 
can do and what they cannot do, and act accordingly. It is tamasic to underestimate 

or overestimate our abilities.
The other traits listed need no comment since they are going on around us all 
the time. We just need to watch out and not su
"
er the consequences of othersÕ 

foolish action and inaction.
Sattwic doer
A doer free from attachment, non-egoistic, endowed with steadfastness 
and resolution, and una
"
ected by success or failure, is said to be sattwic 
(18:26). 
Anahamvadi
 (non-egoistic) means Òfree from talk of oneselfÓ or Òfree from self-
speaking,Ó ÒselfÓ here being 
aham
, the ego. This is not just bragging; it is 
continually talking about oneself, whether complimentary, derogatory or trivial. 
This is a major trait of spiritual fakes, whatever the type. No matter what the 
328
subject is, it somehow always gets around to them and sticks there. I have some 
tapes of various disciples of renowned gurus that are supposedly their 
remembrances of the gurus. In one tape that is over an hour in length the guru is 
spoken about only once, and then for only about four minutes. In another tape it is 

the same, but only two minutes. I also have some videotapes made of disciples that 
are some hours in length, and it is the same story. Sometimes an incident with the 
guru is brießy cited, followed by at least half an hourÕs philosophical disquisition 

that is Þlled with incidents from the speakerÕs life. A very famous Buddhist teacher 
in Europe is known for the fact that he never speaks of philosophy or spiritual texts, 
but talks on and on about himself, usually with very little point.
Rajasic doer
A doer that is passionate, desiring to obtain actionÕs fruits, greedy, violent-
natured, impure, easily elated or dejected, is declared to be rajasic (18:27).
Ragi
 (passionate) means someone in the grip of ragaÐpassionate desire for 
something.
Lubdhas
 (greedy) means someone who is consumed with desire for material 
things.
Himsatmakas
 (violent-natured) is someone whose very nature is violent and bent 
on the injury of others.
Ashucis
 (impure) is someone who is both impure and polluted.
Harshashokanvitah karta
 (easily elated or dejected) means one who is continually 
Þlled with happiness and miseryÐbouncing back and forth from one to the other, 
and often both simultaneously, so confused and unstable is such a person. So is the 
rajasic person, and so is rajasic religion!
Tamasic doer
An agent that is unsteady, vulgar, obstinate, false, dishonest, lazy, 
despondent and procrastinating, is said to be tamasic (18:28).
Ayuktas
 means a person who is both undisciplined and unaware of others, acting 
as though he is the only person around that counts.
Prakritas
, means vulgar, ostentatious, and vain.
Naikritikas
 means dishonest as well as generally vile.
Vishadi
 means despondent, but also someone who is depressed and continually 
distressed. This is the way of life for a lot of people who have no real reason to be 
so. Many people are professional gloom-and-doom nay-sayers. They are so negative, 
literally, that they prefer misery to happiness, both for themselves and others. They 

love bad news or the threat of disasters.
Dirghasutri
 means not just procrastinating or dilatory, but someone who never 
really acts, however much he may talk. Those who do nothing because they are so 

convinced they can only fail, also are numbered among the tamasic.
There is not much inspiration in all this, is there? But Krishna wants us to 
intelligently understand what is going on with ourselves and others. ÒFor none of 
329
us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himselfÓ (Romans 17:7).
330
The Three Gunas: Intellect and Firmness
Now hear the three kinds of intellect and steadfastness according to the 
gunas, set forth completely and severally (18:29).
This is an interesting juxtapositioning: intellect and will-power. For what good is 
intelligence without the will to act upon it, and what use is a strong will with no 
intelligence to guide it? Again we see how perfect the Bhagavad Gita is, and how 
unique in the world.
We have considered buddhi quite a bit, but it is good to remember that buddhi 
is intellect, understanding, and reasonÐthe thinking, analytical mind. Dhrita has not 

been covered before. 
A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
 deÞnes it as Òsteadfastness; constancy; 
sustained e
"
ort; Þrmness; patience; endurance.Ó Basically, it is the exercise of the 
will. And in this verse it means the will itself.
Sattwic intellect
That intellect which knows the paths of work and renunciation, when to 
act and when not to act, what ought to be done and what ought not to be 
done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared, bondage and 

liberation, is sattwic (18:30).
Intelligence and just plain good sense is the trait of a sattwic intellect. This 
embraces both mundane and spiritual matters. A sattwic individual always knows 

what is appropriate action, inaction, speech, and silence. He is keenly aware of both 
the practical and the ethical aspects of acting and not actingÐand of the character 
and value of both. He lives according to an inviolable code that of necessity is 

elaborate and subtleÐthough to him it is simplicity and clarity itself because he 
grasps the underlying principles of thought and conduct.
The sattwic person knows when to fear and when not to fear, what is rightly 
feared and what is rightly disregarded. This is a profound thing, for human beings 

are continually being inßuenced by those around them as well as the conditions in 
which they live. Knowing what to be wary of and what to regard lightly is a secret of 

great happiness and freedom from stress. Pressures are exerted on us continually 
from both internal and external sources. Understanding what merits our conformity 
and what has no real claim on us is wisdom beyond price.
But the most important knowledge is that of bondage and liberationÐnot just the 
philosophical concepts of bandha and moksha, but those things which either 

produce or abrogate them.
We see from this that the sattwic person is in total charge of his internal and 
external lifeÐnot by mere will power but by insight into the truth of himself and all 

he encounters.
Rajasic intellect
331
That intellect which incorrectly understands dharma and adharma, what 
should be done and what should not be done, is rajasic (18:31).
This does not mean being wrong all the time, but being right sometimes and 
wrong sometimes, sometimes on the beam and sometimes o
"
. This is the 
experience of nearly everyone: you win a few and you lose a few. This is because our 
understanding is imperfect and also because it can be clouded by various mental 
factors, not the least of which is simple ignorance. At the root of this condition is 

ßuctuation of the very mind-substance, the chitta, so it cannot perfectly intuit the 
nature of objects and actions. Desires and fears ßaw our judgment.
Tamasic intellect
That intellect enveloped in darkness, regarding adharma as dharma, and 
seeing all things pervertedly (turned backward: that is, seeing all things 
completely opposite to their true nature or state), is tamasic (18:32).
The key to this state is the word 
viparitan
, which Sargeant translates Òperverted,Ó 
but which actually means ÒcontraryÓ or Òturned backward.Ó The idea is that the 

mind is in a state of continual reversal that sees things opposite to what they really 
are. The mind has become like a photographic negative: what is really light is dark, 
and what is really dark is light. This is the habitual state of a tamasic intellect. 

Everything is consistently false, contrary to reality. This is the state of literal 
negativity. It is a terrible thing.
The only positive thing about it is that when we know such a person we can tell 
the nature of anything by their reaction to it. If they like something then it is 

harmful or evil. If they dislike something it is beneÞcial and good. I have known 
several people like this and I often used them as a kind of aberrant oracle. I would 

present something to them and see how they reacted. They were one hundred 
percent trustworthy in their responseÐif they liked something I knew it was 
poisonous, and if they detested something I knew it was truly good. Even in the 

Þeld of religion I found them to have an unerring accuracy, as long as I took 
everything opposite to their opinion, of course. In relation to religion, politics, 
people, even health matters, and especially morality and ethics, they are perfect 

judges. They can be trusted to always see (or claim they see) things opposite to 
what they really are.
Sattwic Þrmness (steadfastness)
That Þrmness of intellect or purpose by which through yoga the functions 
of the mind, the vital force (prana) and the senses are restrained, is sattwic 
(18:33).
Another, equally legitimate translation is: ÒThe Þrmness by which, 
through the 
unswerving practice of yoga
, one holds fast the functions of the mind, vital force and 

the sensesÐthat Þrmness is sattwic.Ó Of course, the core idea of both versions is 
that sattwic Þrmness is produced by the practice of yoga. For only through yoga can 
there be any appreciable or permanent control of the mind, prana, or senses. The 
332
key word is 
avybhicharinya
, which does mean Òunswerving,Ó but also means Ònot 
going astrayÓ in the sense of not departing from the right practice of yoga. I say this 
because most that is called yoga either does nothing or harms and confuses the 
mind, whereas the Upanishads, the Gita, and the Yoga Sutras all agree on the right 

yogic process. The sadhaka who studies those texts and holds steadfastly to what he 
learns there will unerringly reach the Goal.
Rajasic Þrmness
But that Þrmness by which one holds to dharma, enjoyment and wealth 
from attachment and desire for the fruits of action, is rajasic (18:34).
Besides desire for the fruits of action, this verse includes desire for what is 
brought to a person by the possession of duty, pleasures, and wealth. Since the 
dharma of a rajasic person is based on self-interest, on the ego itself, it cannot be 

real dharma, and cannot produce the positive e
"
ects of dharma. Rather, it 
compounds the enslavement to the demands of ego. It is adharma: Ònot dharma.Ó
Tamasic Þrmness
That Þrmness by which a stupid person does not abandon sleep, fear, 
depression and arrogance, is tamasic (18:35).
Obviously we all need sleep to live normally, but Krishna mentions 
swapna
 
(sleep) here to indicate being asleep in the mind, whatever the bodily state. At the 
same time it is true that tamasic people sleep too much, and are continually 

dropping o
"
 the moment they sit still. Many of them take refuge in sleep so they 
will not have to face the mess they have made of their life. I have known negative 
people that would fall asleep the moment they came into a positive spiritual 

atmosphere. It was their way of blotting it out.
Krishna is not speaking of those that have a physical problem which saps their 
vitality. Such people are not tamasic but ill and need the assistance of professional 

health care. For example, I knew a woman who, when asked how she was, 
invariably answered: ÒOh, I am so 
tired
É.Ó Much later it was discovered that she 
was su
"
ering from leukemia. Anemic people have this symptom as well.
Anyhow, tamasic people will not give up Òlazing aroundÓ mentally or physically. 
Even more, they are addicted to fear (often in the form of worry), and grief (often in 
the form of discontent and generally being Òout of sortsÓ). They love to blame and 

they love to brood and they love to be ÒhurtÓ and Òwronged.Ó Their depression 
(v
ishadam
) is a wallowing in self-pity and blame of others. It often takes the form of 
pessimism and distrust of others.
Vishadam also can mean a kind of lassitude, and ÒwhatÕs the use?Ó lack of 
motivation. Although such people are as boring and tiresome as possible, Krishna 

says another trait is 
madam
, which means pride and conceit to the level of virtual 
intoxication of ego. You would not expect this of dreary, Òpoor meÓ people, but I 
have seen it to be true. The more tamasic, the more inwardly arrogant and proud, 
even to the point of psychosis. Such a person is called 
durmedha
, which means dull-
333
witted as well as outright stupid. A lot of tamasic people I have known were not 
mentally limitedÐsome were quite intelligentÐbut they were dull, dreary, and boring 
by choice
. And they were all steadfast in their tamasic slough.
This study may have been a bit tedious, and certainly not very inspiring, but it is 
necessary for us to know all this.
334
The Three Kinds of Happiness
Now hear from me of the threefold happiness that one enjoys through 
practice and by which one attains to the end of pain (18:36).
It is said that everyone wants to be happy, but happiness is not the same to 
everyone. So Krishna now takes up that subject, for people di
"
er greatly in Òthe 
pursuit of happinessÓ owing to the predominance of one of the three gunas.
Sattwic happiness
That happiness which is like poison at Þrst, but like amrita in the end, 
born of the light of oneÕs own Self [atmabuddhi], is declared to be sattwic 
(18:37).
Sri Ramakrishna often remarked that rock sugar (not reÞned sugar) is a cure for 
certain liver ailments, but to those with such disorders sugar tastes bitter, so they 

avoid it. The same thing is true of certain other substances. A naturopath once gave 

me a cup of warm liquid to drink. I swallowed it down and remarked that it tasted 
good. ÒIf you had said it was nasty tasting, I would have known that you have liver 
trouble,Ó he said. It is the same with those (us?) who have spiritual disorders: that 

which cures them seems distasteful to them and they avoid it. This is a very 
problematical situation. People have to pervert their bodies to develop addictions to 
poisonous substances, and in time their addictions seem normal and even healthy, 

and abstinence seems miserable and harmful. It is the same with the mind and 
heart.
A friend of mine once spoke with a young man who was utterly addicted to 
immorality and alcohol. When he pointed out the misery those things caused, the 

man countered with: ÒLiving like you do would be like living in a prison!Ó He had 
no idea how free the other man was, and how content as a result of his abstinence 

and spiritual outlook. Krishna is speaking of this here. In the beginning that great 
happiness and fulÞllment which is
 atmabuddhiprasadajam
Ðarising from the 
tranquility, purity, and brightness of the union of the buddhi with the AtmaÐseems 
like a pipe dream or even death. But those who pursue it will Þnd it is the joy of 
immortality.
Nevertheless, an important principle is set forth in this verse. In the beginning it 
is normal for spiritual practice to be boring or even annoying. But at the end it will 

be all sukha: happiness and ease. For it never really is poison, but only seems so to 
the distorted mind-mirror of those bound in ignorance.
Rajasic happiness
That happiness arising from the contact of the senses with their objects, 
which in the beginning is like amrita but changes into that which is like 
poison, is declared to be rajasic (18:38).
335
Here we have the opposite of the previous verse. Those things that to the 
ignorant seem like the nectar of immortality (ÒThis is really living!Ó ÒThis is the 
way to live!Ó ÒI like it: give me more!Ó) will in time be seen as deadly poison, but 
then it is often too late. That is why the Bible says: ÒRemember now thy Creator in 

the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when 
thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in themÓ (Ecclesiastes 12:1). The happiness of 
rajas is simply foolÕs gold.
An interesting point: In this and the previous verse the word 
pariname
 is found. 
It means Òwhen transformed,Ó the idea being that in time the two kinds of 

happiness transmute or ripen into either amrita or poison. Actually, they reveal 

their inner natureÐthey do not really change, but it seems so to the sadhaka.
Tamasic happiness
That happiness which in the beginning and as a result is delusive of the 
Self, arising from sleep, indolence and heedlessness, is declared to be tamasic 
(18:39).
Krishna describes tamasic happiness as 
mohanam
Ðdeluding, addicting, and 
confusingÐarising from spiritual ÒsleepÓ (
nidra
), idleness and outright spiritual 
laziness (
alasya
), and negligence and confusion (
pramada
). Notice that, unlike 
sattwic and rajasic happiness, tamasic happiness does not transform into anything 
other than what it is at the beginning. It does not lead to anything, but remains 
utterly inert. Sattwic and rajasic happiness leads to conclusions about their merit or 

demerit. Tamasic happiness, on the other hand, simply lies there and wallows in its 
own inertia. It goes nowhere.
There is a lesson for us here. We need not worry about sattwic people because 
they will become increasingly established in sattwa. We need only wait for rajasic 

people to wake up and move up to sattwa. And we need not even give a second 
thought to the tamasic: they are going to stay right where we see them. The essence 

of this is that sensible people do not go around trying to change others. The sattwic 
are already what they should be, the rajasic are moving toward sattwa, and the 
tamasic are simply that: tamasic. They Òcome from the nowhere and go to the no-

place.Ó (I am only speaking of the present birth. They, too, progress in time, but 
very slowly and it takes a great deal of time for them to crawl out into even half-
light.) The wise bless others and keep on working on themselves. Certainly they 

will encourage those with them on the path and even assist them, but they cannot 
put anyone on the path or keep them there. Experience proves this over and over.
We are all in it together
There is no being either on earth, nor yet in heaven among the gods, that 
can exist free from these three gunas born of Prakriti (18:40).
There we have it. All are caught in the net woven of the gunas. However, sattwa 
leads to liberation from that net, to the state known as 
trigunatita
ÐÒbeyond the three 
gunas.Ó But until that state is reached we will live according to the guna dominant 
336
in us. This is the real basis of authentic caste, and Krishna now takes up that 
subject:
Of the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas, as also the Shudras, the 
duties are distributed according to the qualities of their swabhava (18:41).
In this section of verses, ÒdutyÓ is the usual translation of ÒactionsÓ (karma), 
and cannot be objected to. But in these verses it also means the actions that will be 

done by the di
"
erent castes, impelled by their innate nature (swabhava). In other 

words, these are the things that will be done, and the qualities revealed, 
spontaneously by the various castes. Caste is not determined by action, but action is 
produced by the innate caste-nature, the swabhava.
The brahmins
Tranquility, self-restraint, tapasya, purity, patience, uprightness, 
knowledge, realization [vijnana], belief in GodÐthese are the duties of 
Brahmins, born of their swabhava (18:42).
It is time for vocabulary-building and review.
A brahmin is one striving for brahmajnana, so we must cultivate the qualities 
listed for them assiduously if we really plan to succeed in our spiritual quest. Here 

they are:
Shama
 is calmness, tranquility, and control of the internal sense organs.
Dama
 is self-control, control of the senses, and restraint.
Tapas (tapasya
) is austerity, practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline; 
spiritual force.
Shaucha
 is purity and cleanliness, including physical and mental purity. Physical 
shaucha involves purity of dietÐabstinence from meat, Þsh, eggs, alcohol, nicotine, 

and any mind-altering drugs.
Kshama
 is forgiveness, patience, and forbearance.

Arjava
 is straightforwardness, honesty, and rectitude.

Jnana
 is knowledge, especially knowledge of (or about) Reality or Brahman, the 
Absolute.
Vijnana
 is the highest knowledge, beyond mere theoretical knowledge. It is 
transcendental knowledge or knowing, a high state of spiritual realization in which 
all is seen as manifestations of Brahman. It is Þnal knowledge of the Self.
Astikyam
 is piety and belief in God.
What is to be noted about these traits is the fact that they are the prerequisites 
for spiritual lifeÐthey are not spiritual life itself, which is something even higher, the 

state of 
yogayukt
a, of continual uniting of the consciousness with God through yoga. 
It is sad to see that in most religions the things needed for being a beginner are 
considered the highest attainments.
Most important is the fact that these traits are not artiÞcial or imposed modes of 
thought and deed, but are a manifestation of the brahminÕs 
swabhava
Ðhis inherent 
state of mind, his state of deep inner being. A brahmin is not one who acts like a 
brahmin, but who 
is
 a brahmin and therefore acts accordingly.
337
The kshatriyas
Valor, splendor, steadfastness, skill, not ßeeing in battle, generosity and 
lordliness of spirit are the duties of Kshatriyas, born of their swabhava 
(18:43).
These are traits needed by us, too, for as a person passes from lower to higher 
caste he retains his positive qualities. So we should consider the qualities of all the 

castes as necessary for us.
Sauryam
 is heroism, valor, and strength.
Tejas
 is radiance and brilliance of mind and spirit.
 
Dhriti
 is the quality of being steadfast, constant, Þrm, patient, and endurant. It 
also means one possessed of the ability to engage in sustained e
"
ort.
Dakshyam
 is skill, virtuosity, and dexterity. One who is 
daksha
 is expert, 
intelligent, wise, and able.
Apalayanam
 is not ßeeing battle or trying to avoid conßict.
Danam
 is generosity, charity, and a giving disposition, as well as self-sacriÞce.
Ishwarabhava
 is a lordly disposition or spirit; nobility and dignity.

All these reveal the swabhava of a kshatriya.
The vaishyas and shudras
Agriculture, cow-herding and trade are the duties of the Vaishyas, born of 
their swabhava, and the ShudrasÕ duty is doing service, born of their 

swabhava (18:44).
This is quite straightforward. It is interesting that only physical actions are 
listed, whereas both the brahmins and kshatriyas require many psychological 

factors. Obviously vaishyas and shudras require ethical principles as much as 

anyone else. In fact, all that has been said in the previous chapters of the Gita 
applies to all the castes.
EveryoneÐswakarma
Krishna now speaks of humanity in general, saying:
SatisÞed in his own duty, a man attains perfection. Hear how he who is 
happy in his own duty [swakarma] Þnds perfection. By worshipping with his 
swakarma him from whom all beings have their origin, by whom all this 
universe is pervaded, a man [manava: human being] Þnds perfection 

(18:45-46).
We have already encountered swabhava and swadharmaÐthe inmost disposition 
of the Self and the dharma (usually translated ÒdutyÓ) that reveals the Self or makes 

attainment of the Self possible. In these two verses we meet the word 
swakarma
: 
action that reßects or manifests the SelfÐat least in its present state of evolution. To 

follow or engage in our swakarma is to worship God, for spiritual, evolutionary 

principles are not to be merely ascribed to or discussed, 
they are to be lived
. That is 
how we evolve, and evolution is the sole purpose of creation.
338
Swakarma is an inseparable part of swadharma, so Krishna continues:
Better is oneÕs own swadharma, though imperfect, than anotherÕs duty, 
though well performed. Performing the duty prescribed by oneÕs own nature 

(swabhava) produces no fault (18:47).
We are not talking here of ÒGodÕs willÓ in the negative, fear-Þlled way of 
Western religion. We are talking of our own nature, which has been put into our 

hands and which we alone can perfect. If we violate our nature by work alien to that 

nature, however good it may appear or how much it may be praised by others, we 
incur evil, for we sin against ourself. Therefore:
The duty to which one is born should not be abandoned, although faulty, 
for all undertakings are enveloped by defects as is Þre by smoke (18:48).
Two expressions in this verse are very important: 
sahajam karma
 and 
dosha
. Sahaja 
means that which is innate, actually inborn. Karma is action. So sahajam karma is 
that kind of action, that way of life, which is a natural expression of our innate 
character, of our deep mind. This must be engaged in, even though, as Krishna 
points out, all relative existence and action are obscured to a greater or lesser 

degree by doshaÐdosha being imperfection, blemish, fault, or shortcoming. This is 
because of the innate nature of relativity itself, which fundamentally is Maya, or 
illusion.
We do the best we can with what we have. The reward is inÞnite.
339
Freedom
The supremely free
He whose intellect (buddhi) is unattached, whose lower self is subdued, 
from whom desire has departed, by renunciation attains the supreme state of 
freedom from action (18:49).
Sometimes detachment is mistaken for a kind of emotionless or ßat state of 
mind devoid of response or reaction. I have known yogis who tried to maintain a 

zombie-like state they thought was detachment. Some even refused to show their 

children or one another a
"
ection because they feared becoming attached. But this is 
a misunderstanding, and the word 
asakta
 clears it up. For it means Ònot-clinging,Ó 
letting things simply pass on without trying to hold on to them. I have lived with 
great yogis who greatly loved music and beauty, but they never formed an 
attachment or addiction to them. They enjoyed them while keeping their awareness 
centered in the Self and free from identiÞcation or grasping after them. They had 

great hearts that rejoiced in the good fortune of others and grieved at their 
misfortune.
One time in Delhi a great yoga-siddha came to the home of some of my friends. 
My friends were dedicated yogis and invited some other sadhakas to come meet the 

saint. Among the group was an aged woman in great anguish of heart. When she 
told her sorrow to the saint, to my amazement he began to shed tears in sympathyÐ

and so did all the others present. This was a great lesson to me, one that my yogi-
friends back in the West needed as well. For detachment is not indi
"
erence. 
Throughout the world for over two thousand years people have honored both 

Buddha and Jesus more for their compassion and caring than even for their wisdom.
Without self-mastery there is no hope of freedom. The self referred to here is 
the lower self, the appendages of the true Self that are usually mistaken for It. And 

that must be conquered, so there must be a battleÐwhich is what the Gita is all 
about.
Vigatasprihah
 merits a looking into. 
Sprihas
 means deep desire, intense longing 
for something, as well as envy at its possession by someone else. 
Vigata
 means 
Ògone awayÓ or Òcompletely disappeared.Ó In the freed individual sprihas is not 
present and suppressed, or even latent, but rather has been completely banished 

and dissolved permanently. This is an exalted state, but one we all canÐand mustÐ
attain.
Anyone can physically turn from something or rid their external life from it, but 
only the yogi can truly renounce: that is, renounce it mentally in his heart. This is 

the renunciation Krishna is speaking of. When one has attained that, then he is 
nishkarmyasiddhim
Ðperfect in non-action. For his mind no longer acts, only his lower 

self which is the instrument of his enlightenment. This is a supreme (paramam) 
state, as he says.
340
Attaining Brahman
Learn from me in brief how one who has attained perfection also attains 
Brahman, that supreme state of knowledge (18:50).
Krishna is not saying that union with Brahman is a kind of secondary side-e
"
ect 
of non-attachment and non-action, but he is indicating that Brahmajnana is so 
abstract and exalted that those who attempt to reach it may fail. But if they turn 
inward and work with their own consciousness they will remove the obstacles to 

BrahmajnanaÐand thus attain it. The wise work with what is at hand. It is like 
pulling on a rope to bring something closer to us and into our grasp. We only reach 
the top step of a stair by stepping on the lower ones in between. It seems obvious, 

but the ego has a way of blinding us to such simple truths.
Qualifying for knowing Brahman
Now we encounter another list of necessary traits, this time the requisites for 
knowing Brahman. They come at the end of the Gita because it is so crucial for us 
to know about them and to strive for them single-mindedly.
Endowed with a supremely pure intellect, controlling the lower self by 
Þrmness, turning from the objects of the senses, beginning with sound, 

casting o
"
 attraction and aversion, dwelling in a solitary place, eating lightly 

(what is easily digested), with speech, body and mind controlled, constantly 
devoted to yoga meditation, taking refuge in vairagya, forsaking egotism, 
force, pride, desire, anger, possessiveness, freed from the notion of ÒmineÓ 

and peacefulÐhe is Þt for union with Brahman (18:51-53).
Buddhya vishuddhaya yukto
 means Òunited to a totally puriÞed intelligence 
[buddhi],Ó the idea being that the yogiÕs awareness must at all times be united with 

his highest intelligence. It can also mean Òwith a totally puriÞed intelligence in a 
state of yogaÓÐin union with the consciousness that is the Self. As in most Sanskrit 
texts, all possible meanings are intended. Yoga the practice is the way to yoga the 

state of union.
Dhrityatmanam niyamya
 means Òcontrolling [or subduing] oneÕs self with 
Þrmness [or determination].Ó It can also mean Òsteadily [i.e., continuously] 

controlling oneÕs self.Ó Mastery is the meaning hereÐperpetual mastery.
Shabdadin vishayans tyaktva
 means Òhaving abandoned [or left behind] the objects 
[or spheres] of the senses, beginning with sound.Ó This is a profound yogic 

principle. By means of sound all the other sense-objects or sensory mental levels 
can be transcended. This if course refers to the subtle sound of japa within 
meditation.
Ragadveshau vyudasya
 means Òcasting aside [or rejecting, abandoning] raga-
dweshaÓ the alternating cycles of attraction and repulsion, liking and disliking, 

loving and hating.
Viviktasevi
 means Òliving in solitudeÓ or Òfrequenting isolated places.Ó The Þrst is 
both external and internal. The truth is, a person can live in a high-rise apartment 
341
complex and still live in solitude if he keeps to himself and maintains inward 
awareness. But it is helpful if the yogi can live in a quiet, uncrowded place, even 
outside a city. This is ideal, but the ideal cannot always be obtained. The second 
meaning would apply to someone who simply cannot live in solitude. He should go 

as much as possible to quiet, isolated places and stay there as long as possible. Sri 
Ramakrishna continually advised this. His great disciple, Mahendranath Gupta 
(ÒMÓ), the author of 
The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna
, followed this assiduously. He had 
several secret places, some in Calcutta and some outside, where he would disappear 
for a day or more, or he would stay in those places but return home for meals. Sri 
Ramakrishna said this was absolutely necessary to gainÐand retainÐoneÕs spiritual 

progress.
Krishna is not telling the yogi to be completely anti-social, but he deÞnitely 
means for us to live mostly to ourselves. Even satsang should be limited.
Laghvashi
 means two things: Òeating lightlyÓ and Òeating things that are easily 
digested.Ó Both are needful to good health, yet we must not interpret Òeating 

lightlyÓ as starving ourselves. So a yogi should do his best in these matters, always 

keeping good sense in mind.
Yaktavakkayamanasah
 means Òwhose speech, body, and mind are controlled 
[disciplined].Ó
Dhyanayogaparo nityam
 means Òconstantly [ceaselessly] devoted to yoga 
meditationÓ and Òconstantly holding yoga meditation as the highest object.Ó The 

yogi does not merely tincture his life with yoga, making it a kind of Òyoga cooler,Ó 

but rather constantly practices meditationÐwhich in this instance includes constant 
japaÐand considers it the supreme commitment and factor of his life. This is rare, 
and so are realized yogis, for that very reason.
Vairagyam samupashritah
 means Òtaking refuge in dispassion [vairagya]Ó and 
Òsupported by dispassion.Ó The Þrst meaning indicates that we do not wait for the 

virtue of vairagya to arise of its own accord as a result of spiritual practice, but 

rather that we take hold of ourselves and deliberately turn from troubling objects or 
situations, refusing to permit them in our lives, and cutting o
"
 all responses to 
them. We also expel from our minds and lives (including our environment) all 

things and situations that destroy dispassion. That is why we have a free will: to be 
used to eliminate that which erodes it. It is a necessary foundation for our spiritual 
peace and safety.
Now we are given a list of things the yogi relinquishes. The word 
vimuchya
 does 
not mean a mere laying aside or a temporary cessation, but total abandonment, 

either getting it away from us, or ourselves away from it. Here is what Krishna says 

we eliminate from our life (including our minds and hearts):
Ahankara
Ðegotism and ego-consciousness.

Balam
Ðforce, in the sense of coercion or bullying of others. This is a facet of 
ahimsa, actually. But I would like to point out that if this word was spelled with a 
long Þrst ÒaÓ instead of a short one, the word would mean Òchildishness,Ó and 
would equally apply as a requisite for successful yoga practice. Considering that the 
342
ego is a monstrous child, this may be the intended word. In 
Dracula
, Dr. Van 
Helsing speaks of the fact that Dracula is really a cunning and powerful infant, and 
speaks of Òhis so-great child mind,Ó because over the centuries he has become 
increasingly infantile as his greedy and demanding ego has consumed everything 

else about him.
Darpam
Ðarrogance and pride, both traits of a childish, egoic mind.

Kamam
Ðdesire and longing for things.
Krodham
Ðanger and wrath directed towards others.
Parigraham
Ðgrasping after things, taking them, seizing them either legally or 
illegally. This includes hoarding and constant adding to oneÕs possessions.
That is what we give up. What do we acquire?

Nirmanas
ÐunselÞshness, for the word literally means Ònot mine.Ó It, too, implies 
not acquiring things just for the getting of them.
Shantas
Ðtranquility, calmness, being completely at peace.

All thoseÐand only thoseÐwho Þt this entire list are 
brahmabhuyaya kalpate
: Þt 
(qualiÞed) for oneness with Brahman. Others have done it, and so can we. Yet, we 
see from this how few yogis there really are. And why.
343
The Great Devotee
We tend to think of union with Brahman as a result of jnana, of being a perfect 
jnani. And this is so, certainly, otherwise Adi Shankaracharya would not have 
written so much on the subject of jnana. But perhaps we mistake bhaktiÐdevotionÐ
for something much less. As Swami Sivananda was wont to comment: Òemotion is 

not devotion.Ó Bhakti means dedication, a strong a
!
nity for somethingÐso strong 
that it brings us to the object of our devotion, or brings it to us. (Usually it is a 
combination of both.)
Sri Ramakrishna is unique among IndiaÕs spiritual teachers for many reasons, 
but one of the most remarkable is his ability to make clear in a sentence what 

others would take a multitude of words to make only slightly more comprehensible. 

Whenever he prefaced something with the words: ÒDo you know what it is like?ÉÓ 
a gem of astounding wisdom would followÐand so simple that anyone could 
understand easily. He formulated a whole system of spiritual life that is unequaled 

for its simplicity and profundity. He deÞned bhakti and jnana in a sentence apiece. 
Here they are:
ÒJnana is knowing ÔThe world is unreal; Brahman alone is real.ÕÓ
ÒBhakti is feeling: ÔGod is the Master and I am the servant.ÕÓ
Obviously a sensible person ascribes to both propositions. Only the 
accomplished yogi is really a jnani or a bhakta. Consequently Krishna says:
Absorbed in Brahman, with Self serene, he grieves not nor desires, the 
same to all beings, he attains supreme devotion unto me (18:54).
Well, there we have it. Bhakti and Brahmajnana are inseparable. Actually bhakti 
is the fruit of realization. Yet bhakti is both cause and e
"
ect, for he continues:
By devotion to me he comes to know how great I am in truth, then having 
known me in truth, he forthwith enters into me (18:55).
Literally, part of this verse says: ÒHe comes to realize how great and Who I am.Ó 
It also equally means: ÒHe comes to realize the extent of my BeingÓÐthe inÞnity of 
God. Having known this in truthÐnot just in theory or Òon faithÓÐsuch a one 

straightaway enters Brahman.
Doing all actions, always taking refuge in me, by my grace he attains the 
eternal, immutable state 
[abode]
 (18:56).
Madvyapashrayah
 literally means both Òtrusting in meÓ and Òtaking refuge in 
me.Ó This is a natural result of those who have understood that their seemingly 

separate existence independent of God is an illusion, that God is in very truth their 

All in All. Thus he becomes their Òeternal, imperishable abode,Ó and they 
themselves are revealed as eternal and imperishable.
Now for some practical instructions:
Reaching the Eternal Abode
344
Mentally renouncing all actions in me, holding me as the highest goal, 
resorting to buddhi-yoga, constantly Þx your mind on me (18:57).
It has already been said in the Gita that it is impossible for anyone to remain 
without acting at any time. For even when sitting still, the body is acting at a 
tremendous degree, and that is all under the direction of the subconscious mind. So 
we are thinking and acting all the timeÐotherwise we would die. For this reason 
Krishna makes a point of saying that all actions must be renounced 
chetasa
Ð
mentally. But he is not advocating just pulling back the mind and being indi
"
erent 
and feeling separated from the action, just being an observer. For that would be 
mere mental isolation. Instead, he says: ÒMentally renouncing all actions 
in me
.Ó 
That is something completely di
"
erent. He is telling us that by the constant 
remembrance of God and awareness that we are living in God, that all is God, we 
should do all actions in the awareness that it is ultimately the divine power that is 

acting, that we are witnesses, but not passive witnesses. Rather, we are intent on 
following the counsel: ÒStand still, and consider the wondrous works of GodÓ (Job 
37:14).
Though Sargeant has Òyoga of discrimination,Ó the Sanskrit is 
buddhiyogam
, the 
yoga of the intellect in the sense of the yoga of our highest and subtlest levels and 

spiritual faculties. Yoga that does not reach to these rareÞed levels is not any yoga at 

all, but a muddling around in the lower levels of our being that will conÞne our 
awareness to those levels.
Certainly discrimination will result from our tapping into those supreme levels 
of our existence, but buddhi yoga is so much more. Krishna says: ÒConstantly Þx 

your mind on me.Ó
How to lose your way
Fixing your mind on me, you shall by my grace surmount all obstacles; but 
if from egotism you will not hear me, then you shall perish (18:58).
Sometimes to succeed we need to know the way to fail. 
Ahamkarat
 literally 
means ÒI making,Ó the assertion and empowering of the ego. The result of this is 
vinankshyasi
, which means both Òyou shall be lostÓ in the sense of losing your way 

and wandering aimlessly and fruitlessly, and Òyou shall perishÓ in the sense of utter 
failure.
You will!
If, Þlled with egotism, you think: ÒI will not Þght,Ó this your resolve shall 
be in vain, for your nature [prakriti] will compel you (18:59).
Krishna here warns Arjuna (and us) against being in the state of 
ashritya na
, 
which literally means Ònot depending onÓ or Ònot taking refuge in.Ó Only when we 
think we are separate from God and capable of being independent do we think we 

can contravene the divine lawÐwhich is the Divine Will. We actually think we can 
circumvent God and do as we please. Basically, we plan to make a fool of God, not 
realizing that we are only making a fool of ourselves. Our very existence depends on 
345
God, and if we are wise we take refuge in GodÐnot in the manner of a pygmy 
groveling at the feet of the master, but by entering into God and reclaiming our 
eternal and irrevocable unity with God. This is the only viable refuge open to us.
If we think we can avoid acting in accordance with the divine plan, 
manyase 
mithya
: Òyou think falsely,Ó or: Òyou imagine in vainÐhopelessly.Ó Is it any wonder 

the world is in the terrible mess we see all around us? People are trying any way 
they can to avoid their only possible destiny. See how they scramble after mirages, 

disdaining the glorious realities open to them, making pathetic excuses for their 
pathetic lives. Yogananda said that during his early years in Boston he was once 
walking in a neighborhood when suddenly God showed him that the houses were 

just like chicken coops and the people inside were like chickens that pecked, 
scratched, laid and hatched eggs, and ended up fried chicken. God then asked him if 
he would like to become fried chicken; and he replied: ÒNo, Lord. I came with Thee 

and I will go with Thee.Ó A wise resolve.
How many people ignorantly say: ÒIt is my life; I will live it as I please;Ó ÒIt is my 
body, I will do with it what I want.Ó Even after two thousand years, who really 

understands or even believes the divine words: ÒWhosoever will save his life shall 
lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall Þnd it. For what is a man 
proÞted, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a 

man give in exchange for his soul?Ó (Matthew 16:25-26). So they pass from life to 
life in confusion and su
"
ering. Awakening does not come easily to such people. So 
Krishna is warning us to not be one of them.
Yes, we like Arjuna must Þght, must engage in the struggle with the unreal so 
the Real can be gained. And if we think we will not, we are very wrong, for even our 

material natureÐour prakritiÐwill compel us. For no matter how we distort our 

presence in this world, it has a single purpose: the return to God. And return we 
shall, though the longer we delay the longer and more demanding will be the battle. 
It is not a matter of whether or not we will become seekers of GodÐonly when. But 

as I say, by delaying we make the struggle much more ferocious and fraught with 
fear.
Many make the excuse of not being ÒreadyÓ for spiritual life, but the moment we 
attained human form we were ready and equipped with all we needed. We all have 

delayed, and that is all the more reason to stop it right now before we make things 
worse for us. Bad things happen to good people because of what they did when they 

were themselves bad people. That is the law.
Krishna drives the message home, saying:

What you do not wish to do, through delusion, you shall do against your 
will, bound by your karma born of your own nature [swabhava] (18:60).
Arjuna did not really have a choice; he had come to the point of evolution where 
only the right thing could be done by him. Let us hurry up and get to that point, 

too.
The ultimate Determiner
346
The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing them by his maya to 
revolve as if mounted on a machine (18:61).
The purpose of this revolution through birth, life, death, and endless repetitions 
of these cycles, is evolution of consciousness. It is Maya because it is a projection of 
appearances only, what Yogananda called Òthe cosmic motion picture.Ó
Fly unto him alone for refuge with your whole being. By that grace you 
shall attain supreme peace and the eternal abode (18:62).
The key words here are Òwhole being.Ó Spiritual life is not a condiment to be 
sprinkled in our life to somehow make it better. Spiritual life is just that: 
life
; and it 
requires the totality of our being to be successful. It is a continual, uninterrupted 

endeavor. For it is our total being that must be transformed in order for us to enter 
the Eternal. Anything less fails.
347
The Final Words
We are approaching the end of the marvelous Bhagavad Gita. KrishnaÕs Þnal 
words are now to be given to us who, like Arjuna, on the battleÞeld of life seek 
wisdom.
Thus has the knowledge that is more secret than all that is secret been 
expounded to you by me. Having reßected on this fully, act in the way you 

wish (18:63).
Nothing like this second sentence can be found in any other scripture of the 
world. This is why the Gita merits our highest valuation and our conformity to its 

glorious message. Krishna respects the free will of Arjuna and knows that 
ultimately it is all ArjunaÕs decision. To interfere with that will by promises, threats, 

warnings, and cajolings will only produce a temporary conformity to KrishnaÕs 
words. Only when it arises from within ArjunaÕs illumined understanding can he 
rightly engage in battle. Nor can we live the yoga life if it is not based on our own 

impulse to divine realization and our full awareness of all that it implies. Krishna 
tells Arjuna to give full consideration to what he has been told and then actÐnot out 
of faith in Krishna, respect for Krishna, or love for Krishna, 
but because he knows it is 
the truth, having understood it for himself
. It is the same for us.
The secret of love
Hear again my highest teaching, most secret of all, because you are dearly 
loved by me; therefore I shall tell you what is for your good (18:64).
KrishnaÕs teachings are not 
sarvaguhyatamam
Ðmost secret of allÐbecause God is 
hiding these truths from us, but because we, through our perverted intuition, are 
hiding them from ourselves! How many times have we heard people say: ÒDonÕt tell 
me that!Ó about something they know is true? And we all grew up with: ÒWhat you 

donÕt know wonÕt hurt you,Ó the idea being that what we donÕt know will not 
obligate us. Wrong! For in the depths of our being we do know the truth, even if 
our whole life is a denial of it. That is why God says in the Bible: ÒYe are gods; and 

all of you are children of the most High. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one 
of the princesÓ (Psalms 82:6-7). The Septuagint renders it: ÒBut you die like men 
and are laid in the grave like animals.Ó It is our choice, but it is a conscious choice, 

at least on the inner levels where it counts.
We babble about love, love, love, but love is truthÐtruth that is loved. Only the 
saints really love, being one with the God who 
is
 love. And they are always truthful 
with us. Even more, they only love the true part of us and oppose the false part. 
They are never the friend of our ego, nor will they ever accommodate it. And they 
will not force or demand us to follow the right way. That is all in our hands. Yet 

they speak only for our welfare. Those who act otherwise are not holy but unholy, 
slaves of their own ÒsacredÓ egos, and uninterested in our genuine welfare.
348
The mind
Fix your mind on me, be devoted to me, sacriÞce and bow down to me. In 
this way you shall truly come to me, for I promise youÐyou are dear to me 
(18:65).
Remember that the ÒmeÓ of Krishna is both the Supreme Self (Paramatman) and 
the individual Self (jivatman). So we are devoted to Spirit and spirit. The word 

manmanas
 is rightly translated ÒÞx your mind on me,Ó but it literally means Òme-
minded.Ó That is, our mind is to be a perfect reßection of Spirit, so that with Saint 
Paul we can say: ÒWe have the mind of ChristÓ (I Corinthians 2:16). ÒLet this mind 
be in you, which was also in Christ JesusÓ (Philippians 2:5). And Saint Peter said to 

the followers of Christ: ÒArm yourselves likewise with the same mindÓ (I Peter 4:1).
Krishna and the Apostles speak like this because we are the divine Self: ÒChrist 
in you, the hope of gloryÓ (Colossians 1:27). It is too bad that Christians do not 

believe the words of Saint Paul: ÒGod, who commanded the light to shine out of 
darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory 
of God in the face of Jesus ChristÓ (II Corinthians 4:6).
We must be Krishna-minded and Christ-minded, for that is to be God-minded. 
And we are dear (priya) to God.
Refuge
Abandoning all duties, take refuge in me alone; then I shall free you from 
all demerits, do not grieve (18:66).
Everything must be the way to God to us. Even right action is not to be valued 
for itself, but because it leads to God. The same is true of all spiritual and material 
deeds. We must be able to say with Swami Sivananda: ÒOnly God I saw!Ó Krishna 

does not mean that we need not follow the ways of dharma, only that we must keep 
looking at God and not at them as we follow them. God must be the sole purpose of 
our life, the sole means and the sole goal. This is Òabandoning all dutiesÓ in God, as 

God, for God, Òthat God may be all in allÓ (I Corinthians 15:28).
When our consciousness is so Þxed on God, so merged in God that it becomes 
God, then all evils shall fall away like the shadows they are, and we shall live in the 

Light as that Light. Where then, shall grief be? Krishna brings up this subject 
because it was ArjunaÕs grief that sparked the entire discourse. So we have come 
full circle with him.
Tell not this secret toÉ
This should not be spoken of by you at any time to one who is without 
tapasya, nor to one who is not dedicated, nor to one who does not desire to 
listen, nor to one who speaks evil of (mocks) me (18:67).
Two words here need a good look.
Ashushrushave
 means Òone who does not desire to hear (listen)Ó and Òthe non-
obedient.Ó This is both those who just do not want to be bothered and those who 
349
are not unaware of spiritual teaching but do not follow it, for whatever reason or 
excuse.
Abhyasuyati
 means Òhe speaks evil of,Ó Òhe shows indignation toward,Ó or Òhe 
sneers at.Ó That pretty well covers the reactions of negative people toward truth: 

they decry it as evil, unnatural, cultish, repressive, superstitious, harmful, scary, and 
suchlike. They love to say: Òthat frightens meÓ about anything they hate. They are 
righteously indignant about it for the previous reasons cited, as well as charging it 

with being false and a way to control others or proÞt from them. And they also 
sneer for the same reasons, as well as mocking and despising truth as stupid or 
worthless, backward, primitive, naive, simplistic, etc. They all entail rejection for 

one reason or another.
This implies that we must look carefully at a person before we waste our time. 
As Jesus said: ÒGive not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls 

before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend 
youÓ (Matthew 7:6). Before that Solomon said: ÒSpeak not in the ears of a fool: for 
he will despise the wisdom of thy wordsÓ (Proverbs 23:9). I am aware that good and 

true souls naturally assume that others are as interested and sincere as they, but 
after some experience they come to know di
"
erently. Experience is still the best 
teacher.
We must not waste time or degrade precious truth by speaking with unÞt 
persons. We should just say something diplomatic or neutral and change the subject 

or leave.
It is obvious from this that Krishna would never countenance forcing wisdom on 
anyone, or trying to convert them or change their views.
On the other hand
He who with supreme devotion to me teaches this supreme secret unto my 
devotees shall doubtless come to me (18:68).
Abhidhasyati
 means to present and to explain. To teach the worthy is the highest 
devotion to God, for Òinasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my 
brethren, ye have done it unto meÓ (Matthew 25:40). Those who illumine the path 

of their worthy fellow-seekers shall themselves go unerringly to God.
And no one among all men shall do more pleasing service to me, nor shall 
there be another on the earth dearer to me than he. And he who will study 

this dharmic dialogue of ours, by him will I have been worshipped through 
the sacriÞce of knowledge; such is my conviction. Even the man who hears 
this, full of faith and not sco
!
ng, he also, liberated, shall attain the happy 

worlds of those of righteous deeds (18:69-71).
Let us take these words to heart. The Gita is an open door to the highest 
consciousness and life.
What will you do?
All the hearing in the world is pointless if it does not result in a resolve, in a 
350
conclusion of some sort. So Krishna asks Arjuna (and us):
Has this been heard by you with a one-pointed mind? Has the delusion of 
your ignorance been destroyed? (18:72).
There are those who listen with the ears on their head, but not the ears of their 
mind and heart. Krishna indicates here that those who truly listen with an intent 
mind will have their ignorance and delusion dispelled by their intelligent attention.
The right answer
Arjuna said: My delusion is destroyed, and I have regained my knowledge 
through your grace; I am Þrm and my doubts are gone. I will act according to 
your word (18:73).
No need to comment on thisÐjust ÒGo, and do thou likewiseÓ (Luke 10:37).
The narrator speaks
Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard this wondrous dialogue of Krishna and the 
great-souled Arjuna, which causes the hair to stand on end. By the grace of 

Vyasa have I heard this supreme and most secret yoga directly from Krishna, 
YogaÕs Lord, himself declaring it. O King, remembering again and again this 
marvelous dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again. 

And remembering again and again that most marvelous form of Krishna, great 
is my wonder, O King, and I rejoice again and again (18:74-77).
And us
If we, too, will remember again and again, without ceasing, this supreme 
scripture of enlightenment, wondering at the wisdom-grace of Krishna and the 
readiness of Arjuna to follow the Way pointed out to him, then we will join our 
voices with SanjayaÕs and say with total certainty and understanding:
Wherever there is Krishna, YogaÕs Lord, wherever is Arjuna the bowman, 
there will forever be splendor, victory, wealth and righteousness: this is my 

conviction
 
(18:78).
OM. Peace. Peace. Peace.
351
Glossary
Abhyasa:
 Sustained (constant) spiritual practice.
Abhyasa Yoga:
 Yoga, or union with God, through sustained spiritual practice.
Adharma:
 Unrighteousness; demerit, failure to perform oneÕs proper duty; 
unrighteous action; lawlessness; absence of virtue; all that is contrary to 
righteousness (dharma).
Adhibhuta:
 Primal Being; pertaining to the elements; the primordial form of 
matter.
Adhidaiva:
 Primal God.
Adhiyajna:
 Primal SacriÞce; Supreme SacriÞce.
Adhyatma:
 The individual Self; the supreme Self; spirit.

Adityas
: Solar deities, the greatest of which is Vishnu.
Agni:
 Fire; Vedic god of Þre.
Ahankara:
 Ego; egoism or self-conceit; the self-arrogating principle ÒI,Ó ÒIÓ am-
ness; self-consciousness.
Ahimsa:
 Non-injury in thought, word, and deed; non-violence; non-killing; 
harmlessness.
Airavata:
 The white elephant of Indra that was produced by the churning of the 
ocean.
Amrita:
 That which makes one immortal. The nectar of immortality that 
emerged from the ocean of milk when the gods churned it.
Ananta:
 InÞnite; without end; endless; a name of Shesha, the chief of the Nagas, 
whose coils encircle the earth and who symbolizes eternity, and upon whom Vishnu 

reclines.
Anarya(n):
 Not aryan; ignoble; unworthy. See Aryan.
Apana:
 The prana that moves downward, producing the excretory functions in 
general; exhalation.
Aparigraha:
 Non-possessiveness, non-greed, non-selÞshness, non-
acquisitiveness; freedom from covetousness; non-receiving of gifts conducive to 

luxury.
Arjava(m):
 Straightforwardness; simplicity; honesty; rectitude of conduct (from 
the verb root 
rinj
: Òto make straightÓ); uprightness.
Arjuna:
 The great disciple of Krishna, who imparted to him the teachings found 
in the Bhagavad Gita. The third of the Pandava brothers who were major Þgures in 

the Mahabharata War. His name literally means Òbright,Ó Òwhite,Ó or Òclear.Ó
Arya(n):
 One who is an AryaÐliterally, Òone who strives upward.Ó Both Arya and 
Aryan are exclusively psychological terms having nothing whatsoever to do with 

birth, race, or nationality. In his teachings Buddha habitually referred to spiritually 

qualiÞed people as Òthe Aryas.Ó Although in English translations we Þnd the 
expressions: ÒThe Four Noble Truths,Ó and ÒThe Noble Eightfold Path,Ó Buddha 
352
actually said: ÒThe Four Aryan Truths,Ó and ÒThe Eightfold Aryan Path.Ó
Aryaman:
 Chief of the Pitris.
Ashwattha:
 The pippal (sacred Þg) tree, in the Bhagavad Gita, the eternal tree 
of life whose roots are in heaven. The Òworld treeÓ in the sense of the axis of the 
earth and even of the cosmos.
Ashwins:
 Two Vedic deities, celestial horsemen of the sun, always together, who 
herald the dawn and are skilled in healing. They avert misfortune and sickness and 

bring treasures.
Astikyam:
 Piety; belief in God.

Asura:
 Demon; evil being (a-sura: without the light).

Asuric:
 Of demonic character.
Bhagavan:
 The Lord; the One endowed with the six attributes, viz. inÞnite 
treasures, strength, glory, splendor knowledge, and renunciation; the Personal God.
Bhrigu:
 An ancient sage, so illustrious that he mediated quarrels among the 
gods.
Bhuta:
 A spirit. Some bhutas are subhuman nature spirits or ÒelementalsÓ, but 
some are earthbound human spiritsÐghosts. Bhutas may be either positive or 

negative.
Brahma:
 The Creator (Prajapati) of the three worlds of men, angels, and 
archangels (Bhur, Bhuwah, and Swah); the Þrst of the created beings; 

Hiranyagarbha or cosmic intelligence.
Brahmachari(n):
 One who observes continence; a celibate student in the Þrst 
stage of life (ashrama); a junior monk.
Brahmacharya:
 Continence; self-restraint on all levels; discipline; dwelling in 
Brahman.
Brahman:
 The Absolute Reality; the Truth proclaimed in the Upanishads; the 
Supreme Reality that is one and indivisible, inÞnite, and eternal; all-pervading, 
changeless Existence; Existence-knowledge-bliss Absolute (Satchidananda); 

Absolute Consciousness; it is not only all-powerful but all-power itself; not only all-
knowing and blissful but all-knowledge and all-bliss itself.
Brahmana:
 A Vedic liturgical text explaining the rituals found in the Vedic 
samhitas (collection of hymns). A guidebook for performing those rites.
Brahmanirvana:
 The state of liberation (nirvana) that results from total union 
with Brahman.
Brahmavada:
 The Path to Brahman; the way to supreme enlightenment.

Brahmavadin:
 Literally Òone who walks the path of Brahman.Ó One who 
advocates that there is one existence aloneÐParabrahman.
Brahmin (Brahmana):
 A knower of Brahman; a member of the highest Hindu 
caste consisting of priests, pandits, philosophers, and religious leaders.
Brihaspati:
 The guruÐpriest and teacherÐof the gods.
Brihatsaman:
 A hymn to Indra found in the Sama Veda.
Buddhi:
 Intellect; intelligence; understanding; reason; the thinking mind; the 
higher mind, which is the seat of wisdom; the discriminating faculty.
353
Buddhi Yoga:
 The Yoga of Intelligence spoken of in the Bhagavad Gita which 
later came to be called Jnana Yoga, the Yoga of Knowledge.
Car-warrior:
 See Maharatha.
Caste: 
See Varna.

Chandra:
 Presiding deity of the moon or the astral lunar world (loka).
Chitraratha:
 The chief of the gandharvas.
Daityas:
 Demons who constantly war with the gods. Sometimes ÒracesÓ or 
nationalities who acted contrary to dharma and fought against the ÒaryasÓ were also 
called demons (daityas or asuras); giant; titan..
Deva:
 ÒA shining one,Ó a godÐgreater or lesser in the evolutionary hierarchy; a 
semi-divine or celestial being with great powers, and therefore a Ògod.Ó Sometimes 

called a demi-god. Devas are the demigods presiding over various powers of 
material and psychic nature. In many instances ÒdevasÓ refer to the powers of the 

senses or the sense organs themselves.
Dharma:
 The righteous way of living, as enjoined by the sacred scriptures and 
the spiritually illumined; characteristics; law; lawfulness; virtue; righteousness; 

norm.
Dharmic:
 Having to do with dharma; of the character of dharma.

Dhrita:
 Steadfastness; constancy; sustained e
"
ort; Þrmness; patience; 
endurance.
Dukha(m):
 Pain; su
"
ering; misery; sorrow; grief; unhappiness; stress; that 
which is unsatisfactory.
Dwesha:
 Aversion/avoidance for something, implying a dislike for it. This can 
be emotional (instinctual) or intellectual. It may range from simple non-preference 

to intense repulsion, antipathy and even hatred. See Raga.
Dwija:
 ÒTwice born;Ó any member of the three upper castes that has received the 
sacred thread (yajnopavita).
Gandharva:
 A demigodÐa celestial musician and singer.
Ganga:
 See Ganges.
Ganges (Ganga):
 The sacred riverÐbelieved to be of divine originÐthat ßows 
from high up in the Himalayas, through the plains of Northern India, and empties 
into the Bay of Bengal. Hindus consider that bathing in the Ganges profoundly 
puriÞes both body and mind.
Garuda:
 A great being who can assume bird form, and therefore considered the 
king of birds. Often depicted as an eagle, he is the vehicle of Vishnu.
Gayatri Meter:
 A meter found only in the Rig Veda, consisting of three lines of 
eight syllables each. It is considered especially appropriate for mantric invocation of 
deities before worship.
Ghee:
 ClariÞed butter.

Guna:
 Quality, attribute, or characteristic arising from nature (Prakriti) itself; a 
mode of energy behavior. As a rule, when ÒgunaÓ is used it is in reference to the 
three qualities of Prakriti, the three modes of energy behavior that are the basic 
qualities of nature, and which determine the inherent characteristics of all created 
354
things. They are: 1) sattwaÐpurity, light, harmony; 2) rajasÐactivity, passion; and 3) 
tamasÐdullness, inertia, and ignorance.
Guru: 
Teacher; preceptor; spiritual teacher or acharya.

Indra:
 King of the lesser ÒgodsÓ (demigods); the ruler of heaven (Surendra 
Loka); the rain-god.
Ishwara:
 ÒGodÓ or ÒLordÓ in the sense of the Supreme Power, Ruler, Master, or 
Controller of the cosmos. ÒIshwaraÓ implies the powers of omnipotence, 

omnipresence, and omniscience.
Janaka:
 The royal sage (raja rishi) who was the king of Mithila and a liberated 
yogi, a highly sought-after teacher of philosophy in ancient India. Sita, the wife of 

Rama, was his adopted daughter.
Jiva:
 Individual spirit.
Kalpa:
 A Day of BrahmaÐ4,320,000,000 years. It alternates with a Night of 
Brahma of the same length. He lives hundred such years. BrahmaÕs life is known as 
Para, being of a longer duration than the life of any other being, and a half of it is 
called Parardha. He has now completed the Þrst Parardha and is in the Þrst day of 

the second Parardha. This day or Kalpa is known as Svetavarahakalpa. In the Day of 
Brahma creation is manifest and in the Night of Brahma is it resolved into its causal 
state.
Kamadeva:
 God of beauty and love; the Vedic Cupid who shoots a bow with 
ßowers instead of arrows.
Kamadhenu:
 Wish-fulÞlling cow produced at the churning of the milk ocean.

Kamadhuk:
 See Kamadhenu.
Kandarpa:
 See Kamadeva.
Kapila:
 The great sage who formulated the Sankhya philosophy which is 
endorsed by Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. (See the entry under Sankhya.)
Karma:
 Karma, derived from the Sanskrit root 
kri
, which means to act, do, or 
make, means any kind of action, including thought and feeling. It also means the 
e
"
ects of action. Karma is both action and reaction, the metaphysical equivalent of 
the principle: ÒFor every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.Ó 
ÒWhatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reapÓ (Galatians 6:7). It is karma 

operating through the law of cause and e
"
ect that binds the jiva or the individual 
soul to the wheel of birth and death. There are three forms of karma: sanchita, 
agami, and prarabdha. Sanchita karma is the vast store of accumulated actions done 

in the past, the fruits of which have not yet been reaped. Agami karma is the action 
that will be done by the individual in the future. Prarabdha karma is the action that 
has begun to fructify, the fruit of which is being reaped in this life.
Karma Yoga:
 The Yoga of selßess (unattached ) action; performance of oneÕs 
own duty; service of humanity.
Karma Yogi:
 One who practices karma yoga.

Karmakanda:
 The ritual portion of the Veda. The philosophy that Vedic ritual is 
the only path to perfection.
Kshatriya:
 A member of the ruler/warrior caste.
355
Kubera:
 The god of wealth.
Kusha:
 One of the varieties of sacred grass (darbha) used in many religious 
rites. Because of its insulating qualities, both physical and metaphysical, it is 
recommended as a seat (asana) for meditation, and as mats for sleeping (it keeps 

the sleeper warm).
Kutastha:
 Immutable; absolutely changeless; not subject to change; literally: 
Òsummit abidingÓ or Òon the summit.Ó He who is found without exception in all 

creatures from Brahma or the creator down to ants and Who is shining as the Self 
and dwells as witness to the intellect of all creatures; rock-seated; unchanging; 
another name for Brahman.
Mahapralaya:
 The Þnal cosmic dissolution; the dissolution of all the worlds of 
relativity (Bhuloka, Bhuvaloka, Swaloka, Mahaloka, Janaloka, Tapaloka, and 

Satyaloka), until nothing but the Absolute remains. There are lesser dissolutions, 

known simply as pralayas, when only the Þrst Þve worlds (lokas) are dissolved.
Maharatha:
 ÒA great-car-warrior,Ó a commander of eleven thousand bowmen as 
he rode in his chariot.
Manava:
 Man; a human being; a descendant of Manu.
Manava dharma:
 The essential nature of man; religion of man; the duties of 
man.
Manu:
 The ancient lawgiver, whose code, The Laws of Manu (Manu Smriti) is 
the foundation of Hindu religious and social conduct.
Manus:
 Progenitors of the human race who were also its lawgivers and teachers.

Margashirsha:
 A lunar month, roughly the latter half of November and the Þrst 
half of December. This is the time of ideal weather in India.
Marichi:
 The chief of the Maruts.
Maruts:
 The presiding deities of winds and storms.
Maya:
 The illusive power of Brahman; the veiling and the projecting power of 
the universe, the power of Cosmic Illusion. ÒThe MeasurerÓÐa reference to the two 
delusive Òmeasures,Ó Time and Space.
Meru:
 The mountain, of supreme height, on which the gods dwell, or the 
mountain on which Shiva is ever seated in meditation, said to be the center of the 

world, supporting heaven itselfÐobviously a yogic symbol of the spinal column or 
merudanda. The name of the central bead on a japa mala (rosary).
Moha:
 DelusionÐin relation to something, usually producing delusive 
attachment or infatuation based on a completely false perception and evaluation of 

the object.
Naga:
 Snake; naked; a kind of powerful spirit-being worshipped in some areas of 
India, possessing great psychic powers and the ability to appear and communicate 

with human beings; one order of Sadhus, who are nude.
Narada:
 A primeval sage to whom some of the verses of the Rig Veda are 
attributed.
Om:
 The Pranava or the sacred syllable symbolizing and embodying Brahman. 
See the book 
Om Yoga Meditation
.
356
Pandavas:
 The Þve sons of King Pandu: Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, 
and Sahadeva. Their lives are described in the Mahabharata.
Pandus:
 See Pandavas.
Papa(m):
 Sin; demerit; evil; sinful deeds; evil deeds.

Parigraha: 
Possessiveness, greed, selÞshness, acquisitiveness; covetousness; 
receiving of gifts conducive to luxury.
Pavaka:
 Agni.
Pitamaha:
 Grandfather; Great Father; titles of Brahma, the Creator.
Pitri:
 A departed ancestor, a forefather.
Prahlada:
 A daitya prince who rejected his daitya heritage and became a devotee 
of Vishnu. His father, the evil Hiranyakashipu, tortured him and attempted his life 
because of his devotion and his speaking to others of divine matters, yet he 
remained steadfast.
Prajapati:
 Progenitor; the Creator; a title of Brahma the Creator.
Prakriti:
 Causal matter; the fundamental power (shakti) of God from which the 
entire cosmos is formed; the root base of all elements; undi
"
erentiated matter; the 
material cause of the world. Also known as Pradhana. Prakriti can also mean the 
entire range of vibratory existence (energy).
Pralaya:
 Dissolution. See Mahapralaya.
Prana:
 Life; vital energy; life-breath; life-force; inhalation. In the human body 
the prana is divided into Þve forms: 1) Prana, the prana that moves upward; 2) 

Apana: The prana that moves downward, producing the excretory functions in 

general. 3) Vyana: The prana that holds prana and apana together and produces 
circulation in the body. 4) Samana: The prana that carries the grosser material of 
food to the apana and brings the subtler material to each limb; the general force of 

digestion. 5) Udana: The prana which brings up or carries down what has been 
drunk or eaten; the general force of assimilation.
Preta:
 Ghost; spirit of the dead.
Purusha:
 ÒPersonÓ in the sense of a conscious spirit. Both God and the 
individual spirits are purushas, but God is the Adi (Original, Archetypal) Purusha, 

Parama (Highest) Purusha, and the Purushottama (Highest or Best of the 

Purushas).
Purushottama:
 The Supreme Person; Supreme Purusha; the Lord of the 
universe. (See Purusha.)
Raga:
 Blind love; attraction; attachment that binds the soul to the universe. 
Attachment/a
!
nity for something, implying a desire for it. This can be emotional 

(instinctual) or intellectual. It may range from simple liking or preference to intense 

desire and attraction. Greed; passion. See Dwesha.
Rajas:
 Activity, passion, desire for an object or goal.

Rajasic:
 Possessed of the qualities of the raja guna (rajas). Passionate; active; 
restless.
Rajoguna:
 Activity, passion, desire for an object or goal.

Rakshasa:
 There are two kinds of rakshasas: 1) semidivine, benevolent beings, 
357
or 2) cannibal demons or goblins, enemies of the gods. Meat-eating human beings 
are sometimes classed as rakshasas.
Rama:
 An incarnation of GodÐthe king of ancient Ayodhya in north-central 
India. His life is recorded in the ancient epic Ramayana.
Rishi:
 Sage; seer of the Truth.
Rita(m):
 Truth; Law; Right; Order. The natural order of things, or Cosmic 
Order/Law. Its root is ri, which means Òto rise, to tend upward.Ó It is said to be the 
basis for the Law of Karma.
Rudras:
 ÒRoarers;Ó Vedic deities of destruction for renewal, the chief of which is 
Shiva; storm gods.
Sadhyas:
 A group of celestial beings with exquisitely reÞned natures thought to 
inhabit the ether.
Sama Veda:
 A collection of Rig Veda hymns that are marked (pointed) for 
singing. It is sometimes spoken of as the ÒessenceÓ of the Rig Veda.
Samsara:
 Life through repeated births and deaths; the wheel of birth and death; 
the process of earthly life.
Sankalpa:
 A life-changing wish, desire, volition, resolution, will, determination, 
or intentionÐnot a mere momentary aspiration, but an empowering act of will that 

persists until the intention is fully realized. It is an act of spiritual, divine creative 

will inherent in each person as a power of the Atma.
Sankhya:
 One of the six orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy whose 
originator was the sage Kapila, Sankhya is the original Vedic philosophy, endorsed 

by Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita (Gita 2:39; 3:3,5; 18:13,19), the second chapter of 
which is entitled ÒSankhya Yoga.Ó 
A Ramakrishna-Vedanta Wordbook
 says: ÒSankhya 
postulates two ultimate realities, Purusha and Prakriti. Declaring that the cause of 
su
"
ering is manÕs identiÞcation of Purusha with Prakriti and its products, Sankhya 
teaches that liberation and true knowledge are attained in the supreme 
consciousness, where such identiÞcation ceases and Purusha is realized as existing 

independently in its transcendental nature.Ó Not surprisingly, then, Yoga is based 
on the Sankhya philosophy.
Sannyas(a):
 Renunciation; monastic life. Sannyasa literally means Òtotal [san] 
throwing away [as],Ó absolute rejection.
Sannyasi(n):
 A renunciate; a monk.
Sapta Rishis:
 ÒSeven Sages.Ó Great Beings who exist at the top of creation and 
supervise it.
Sarva(m):
 All; everything; complete.

Sattwa:
 Light; purity; harmony, goodness, reality.

Sattwa Guna:
 Quality of light, purity, harmony, and goodness.
Sattwic:
 Partaking of the quality of Sattwa.
Shankara:
 ÒThe Auspicious One.Ó A title of Shiva.

Shudra:
 A member of the laborer, servant caste.
Siddha:
 A perfectedÐliberatedÐbeing, an adept, a seer, a perfect yogi.
Skanda:
 Subramanya; the god of war and son of Shiva and Parvati; Skanda.
358
Soma:
 A milkweed, 
Ascelpias acida
, whose juice in Vedic times was made into a 
beverage and o
"
ered in sacriÞces; the nectar of immorality; a name of Chandra, the 
presiding deity of the moon.
Sudarshana Chakra:
 The invincible weapon of Lord Vishnu which is able to cut 
through anything, and is a symbol of the LordÕs power of cutting through all things 

which bind the jiva to samsara. Thus it is the divine power of liberation (moksha).
Swabhava:
 OneÕs own inherent disposition, nature, or potentiality; inherent 
state of mind; state of inner being.
Swadharma:
 OneÕs own natural (innate) duty (dharma, based on their karma 
and samskara. OneÕs own prescribed duty in life according to the eternal law 
(ritam).
Swakarma:
 Action, duty, business or occupation determined by (according to) 
oneÕs own innate nature. 
Tamas:
 Dullness, darkness, inertia, folly, and ignorance.
Tamasic:
 Possessed of the qualities of the tamo guna (tamas). Ignorant; dull; 
inert; and dark.
Tapasya:
 Austerity; practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline; spiritual 
force. Literally it means the generation of heat or energy, but is always used in a 
symbolic manner, referring to spiritual practice and its e
"
ect, especially the roasting 

of karmic seeds, the burning up of karma.
Tyaga:
 Literally: Òabandonment.Ó RenunciationÐin the Gita, the relinquishment 
of the fruit of action.
Tyagi:
 A renouncer, an ascetic.
Uchchaishravas:
 The name of IndraÕs horse (or the horse of the Sun god, 
Surya), that was born of the amrita that was churned from the ocean by the gods. 

The name means Òhigh-soundingÓ and refers to the power of mantra.
Uchchishta[m]:
 The remnants of food eaten by others, the actual leavings from 
someoneÕs plate, considered extremely unclean physically and psychically. (This 

does not apply to food left in a serving dish or cooking vessel unless someone ate 
from it rather than serving it on their own dish.)
Ushanas:
 An ancient seer and poet.
Ushmapas:
 A class of ancestors (pitris) which live o
"
 subtle emanations or 
vapors.
Vairagya:
 Non-attachment; detachment; dispassion; absence of desire; 
disinterest; or indi
"
erence. Indi
"
erence towards and disgust for all worldly things 
and enjoyments.
Vaishya:
 A member of the merchant, farmer, artisan, businessman caste.
Varna:
 Caste. (Literally: color.) In traditional Hindu society there were four 
divisions or castes according to the individualÕs nature and aptitude: Brahmin, 

Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra.
Varuna:
 A Vedic deity considered the sustainer of the universe and also the 
presiding deity of the oceans and water. Often identiÞed with the conscience.
Vasava:
 A name of Indra.
359
Vasudeva:
 ÒHe who dwells in all thingsÓÐthe Universal God.
Vasuki:
 The king of the serpents. He assisted at the churning of the milk ocean.
Vasus:
 Eight Vedic deities characterized by radiance.
Vayu:
 The Vedic god of the wind; air; vital breath; Prana.
Vedas:
 The oldest scriptures of India, considered the oldest scriptures of the 
world, that were revealed in meditation to the Vedic Rishis (seers). Although in 

modern times there are said to be four Vedas (Rig, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva), in the 

upanishads only three are listed (Rig, Sama, and Yajur). In actuality, there is only 
one Veda: the Rig Veda. The Sama Veda is only a collection of Rig Veda hymns that 
are marked (pointed) for singing. The Yajur Veda is a small book giving directions 

on just one form of Vedic sacriÞce. The Atharva Veda is only a collection of 
theurgical mantras to be recited for the cure of various a
#
ictions or to be recited 
over the herbs to be taken as medicine for those a
#
ictions.
Vedic:
 Having to do with the Vedas.
Vijnana:
 The highest knowledge, beyond mere theoretical knowledge (jnana); 
transcendental knowledge or knowing; experiential knowledge; a high state of 

spiritual realizationÐintimate knowledge of God in which all is seen as 
manifestations of Brahman; knowledge of the Self.
Vishnu:
 ÒThe all-pervading;Ó God as the Preserver.
Vishuddha:
 Supremely pure; totally pure.
Vishwa devas:
 A group of twelve minor Vedic deities.
Vrishnis:
 The clan to which Krishna belonged.

Vyasa:
 One of the greatest sages of India, commentator on the Yoga Sutras, 
author of the Mahabharata (which includes the Bhagavad Gita), the Brahma Sutras, 

and the codiÞer of the Vedas.
Yadava:
 ÒDescendant of YaduÓ an ancient Indian king; the Yadavas, a clan of 
India, were descended from King Yadu; a title of Krishna, since he was part of the 

Yadava clan. Swami Bhaktivedanta, founder of the Hare Krishna movement in the 

West, as well as some anthropologists, believed that the Yadava clan, who 
disappeared from India shortly after KrishnaÕs lifetime, emigrated to the middle east 
and became the people we know today as the Jews, Abraham having been a Yadava.
Yajna:
 SacriÞce; o
"
ering; sacriÞcial ceremony; a ritual sacriÞce; usually the Þre 
sacriÞce known as agnihotra or havan.
Yaksha:
 There are two kinds of yakshas: 1) semidivine beings whose king is 
Kubera, the lord of wealth, or 2) a kind of ghost, goblin, or demon.
Yama:
 Yamaraja; the Lord of Death, controller of who dies and what happens to 
them after death.
Yoga:
 Literally, ÒjoiningÓ or ÒunionÓ from the Sanskrit root yuj. Union with the 
Supreme Being, or any practice that makes for such union. Meditation that unites 

the individual spirit with God, the Supreme Spirit. The name of the philosophy 

expounded by the sage Patanjali, teaching the process of union of the individual 
with the Universal Soul.
Yogamaya:
 The power of Maya, of divine illusion. It is Maya in operation, the 
360
operation/movement rising from the presence (unionÐyoga) of God (Ishwara) 
within it, and therefore possessing delusive power.
Yogeshwara:
 Lord of Yoga; a name of Lord Krishna.

Yogi(n):
 One who practices Yoga; one who strives earnestly for union with God; 
an aspirant going through any course of spiritual discipline.
Yuga:
 Age or cycle; aeon; world era. Hindus believe that there are four yugas: 
the Golden Age (Satya or Krita Yuga), the Silver age (Treta Yuga), The Bronze Age 

(Dwapara Yuga), and the Iron Age (Kali Yuga). Satya Yuga is four times as long as 
the Kali Yuga; Treta Yuga is three times as long; and Dwapara Yuga is twice as long. 
In the Satya Yuga the majority of humans use the total potentialÐfour-fourthsÐof 

their minds; in the Treta Yuga, three-fourths; in the Dwapara Yuga, one half; and in 
the Kali Yuga, one fourth. (In each Yuga there are those who are using either more 
or less of their minds than the general populace.) The Yugas move in a perpetual 

circle: Ascending Kali Yuga, ascending Dwapara Yuga, ascending Treta Yuga, 
ascending Satya Yuga, descending Satya Yuga, descending, Treta Yuga, descending 
Dwapara Yuga, and descending Kali YugaÐover and over. Furthermore, there are 

yuga cycles within yuga cycles. For example, there are yuga cycles that a
"
ect the 
entire cosmos, and smaller yuga cycles within those greater cycles that a
"
ect a solar 
system. The cosmic yuga cycle takes 8,640,000,000 years, whereas the solar yuga 

cycle only takes 24,000 years. At the present time our solar system is in the 
ascending Dwapara Yuga, but the cosmos is in the descending Kali Yuga. 
Consequently, the more the general mind of humanity develops, the more folly and 

evil it becomes able to accomplish.
About the Author
A
bbot George Burke
 (Swami Nirmalananda Giri) is the founder and 
director of the Light of the Spirit Monastery (Atma Jyoti Ashram) 
in Cedar Crest, New Mexico, USA.
In his many pilgrimages to India, he had the opportunity of meeting 
some of India™s greatest spiritual ˜gures, including Swami Sivananda of 
Rishikesh and Anandamayi Ma. During his ˜rst trip to India he was 
made a member of the ancient Swami Order by Swami Vidyananda Giri, 
a direct disciple of Paramhansa Yogananda, who had himself been given 
sannyas by the Shankaracharya of Puri, Jagadguru Bharati 
Krishna Tirtha.
In the United States he also encountered various Christian saints, 
including Saint John Maximovich of San Francisco and Saint Philaret 
Voznesensky of New York. He was ordained in the Liberal Catholic 
Church (International) to the priesthood on January 25, 1974, and 
consecrated a bishop on August 23, 1975.
For many years Abbot George has researched the identity of Jesus 
Christ and his teachings with India and Sanatana Dharma, including 
Yoga. It is his conclusion that Jesus lived in India for most of his life, and was a yogi and Sanatana Dharma 
missionary to the West. After his resurrection he returned to India and lived the rest of his life in the Himalayas. 
He has written extensively on these and other topics, many of which are posted at 
OCOY.org
.
Light of the Spirit Monastery
L
ight of the Spirit Monastery
 is an esoteric Christian monastic community for those men who seek direct 
experience of the Spirit through meditation, sacramental worship, discipline and dedicated communal 
life, emphasizing the inner reality of ﬁChrist in you the hope of glory,ﬂ as taught by the illumined mystics of 
East and West. 
˚e public outreach of the monastery is through its website, OCOY.org (Original Christianity and Orig
-
inal Yoga).˚ere you will ˜nd many articles on Original Christianity and Original Yoga, including
 Esoteric 
Christian Beliefs
. 
Foundations of Yoga 
and
 How to Be a Yogi
 are practical guides for anyone seriously interested 
in living the Yoga Life.
You will also discover many other articles on leading an e˛ective spiritual life, including
 ˜e Yoga of the 
Sacraments
 and
 Spiritual Bene˚ts of a Vegetarian Diet
, as well as the ﬁDharma for Awakeningﬂ seriesŒ
in-depth 

commentaries on these spiritual classics: the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, the Dhammapada, and the Tao 

Teh King.
You can listen to podcasts by Abbot George on meditation, the Yoga Life, and remarkable spiritual people 
he has met in India and elsewhere, at 
http://ocoy.org/podcasts
/
Sign up for our newsletter at 
https://ocoy.org/newsletter-registration
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from 
your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from 
your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
More Books from Light of the Spirit Press
Ł
 
R
ead the book online for free. 
Coming Soon!
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book online
 for free.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book online for free. 
Coming Soon!
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Librar
y.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book online
 for free.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book online for free. 
Coming Soon!
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
Ł
 
R
ead the book 
online for free
.
Ł
 
D
ownload a 
free PDF from our 
E-Library
.
Ł
 
B
uy the paperback or ebook from 
Amazon worldwide
.
Ł
 
P
urchase the ebook from your 
favorite online book store
.
